---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim501 

2) Summarize what you think are the three most important findings (or perhaps methodological improvements) in recent studies of recidivism that we read (you can probably come up with more than three, but control yourself).  What do you think are the most useful future directions to advance research on recidivism?

The [[kirkResidentialChangeTurning2012]] piece I thought was both important for its methodological improvements but also for its findings. Methodologically, it used an intriguing and sophisticated instrumental variable design which allowed it to make causal claims. Causal claims are incredibly difficult to make so the fact that this study was able to do so was impressive. Quasi-experimental designs are often subject to many critiques, and this study is no exception. However, the sensitivity analyses and the care taken to address as many concerns as possible is impressive. Furthermore, the findings that individuals who moved away from their old neighborhoods had lower recidivism rates is important theoretically for understanding the mechanisms which drive people to crime and from a practical standpoint when trying to consider how to help people not fall back into a life of crime. It also provides an interesting counterexample to other policies and programs which moved people but did not achieve reductions in recidivism or crime.

The Pettus-Davis and Kennedy (2021) article I also thought was really well thought out and presents powerful arguments as to why recidivism should not be the end-all, be-all outcome it typically is for both researchers and practitioners. They then go on to consider a variety of alternative outcomes which could complement recidivism but would also help to better gauge how successful the reentry programs were working for the ex-offenders.

Third, The Rengifo et al. (2017) piece was really interesting for how it depicted the amount of discretion frontline workers have in the correctional system. Often, in more applied or practice-focused, as opposed to theory-focused, the emphasis is placed on quantitative analysis and evaluating if a particular policy or program _worked or not_. The evaluation then happens according to some criteria or some set of criteria. Not as much attention is given to questions of why did the policy or program work or not work and how faithfully was the policy or program carried out. This research study demonstrates how important it is to answer these questions and how it fruitfully complicates the research surrounding corrections work particularly when looking at efforts to evaluate the impact of some policy or program.

I think all of these papers represent promising future directions for recidivism research. I would like to see more research, though, which considers how restorative justice practices can help aid in reducing recidivism but also help both offenders and those who were wronged heal from the experience. Philosophically, the core belief underlying restorative justice is quite appealing i.e. the person who did the wronging as well as the person wronged both need their humanity restored to end the cycle of victimization. Typically people involved in crime are former victims themselves and vice versa. I would be curious to learn and see how restorative justices can help end this cycle.

3) Frank Cullen discussed lessons from the “12 People who Saved Rehabilitation.”  What “new directions” in correctional research discussed by Frost and Clear present the best opportunities to apply Cullen’s lessons and make big impacts on corrections in the future?

Cullen had five lessons they wanted criminologists to learn from their piece, “12 People Who Saved Rehabilitation”: 1) Figure out when/why/how criminology matters i.e. figure out under _which criminological theories_ apply under _which contexts_, 2) Everybody should be doing rigorous science which will improve our chances of being listened to, 3) Constructing practical knowledge increases the likelihood criminologists will be listened to, 4) Engaging more with the public and practitioners will lead to us being listened more and making more of a difference, 5) Criminology and criminologists constitute a unique and valuable social scientific perspective that can and should help to make a positive difference in the world.

[[frostNewDirectionsCorrectional2012]] presents many new directions for correctional research several of which represent excellent opportunities to apply Cullen’s lessons. The first of which is parole and reentry research. Parole and reentry research are situated firmly in the realm of _practical knowledge_ _building_. There are several research studies Frost and Clear present which demonstrate the potential for rigorous research to be conducted in this area. The ability to do rigorous research combined with its inherent practical applicability also makes this line of research potentially more easily communicable to practitioners, the public, and policymakers who then may be more inclined to believe and follow the implications of the research studies. Finally, parole and reentry research represent excellent opportunities to improve theoretical knowledge. As noted in the Frost and Clear article itself, there is currently a divide in the reentry research which one strand focused on desistance and the life course and the other strand focused more on changing the individual through techniques such as cognitive behavioral therapy. By helping the correctional system determine the best ways to help former offenders reintegrate into society, researchers can learn about which theoretical models work best under which situations.

Another future direction suggested by Frost and Clear which presents an excellent chance to apply the lessons suggested by Cullen is intermediate sanctions. Much like parole and reentry research, there is a lot of room for researchers to apply rigorous scientific practices and improve upon previous research or even conduct original research on this understudied area. The research in this area is also very focused on practical application and as such has great potential to be noticed by practitioners and policy makers. Intermediate sanction research also presents a great opportunity to build criminological theory. Different forms of intermediate sanctions represent the opportunities to test how and when different criminological theories may or may not apply. For example, do intermediate sanctions which restrict the movements of the individuals lead to higher or lower rates of recidivism? Different findings mind lend more or less credence to [[Routine activity]] theories of crime (i.e. by restricting the movement of the would-be offender their opportunities for crime are lessened) vs. social control theories of crime (offenders need to have stakes in conformity and be integrated into the community for offending to cease). Similarly tests of [[differential association]]could happen as offenders in different types of intermediate sanctions may be exposed to more or less anti-criminogenic messaging.

4) Is recidivism per se the only or best outcome on which to evaluate correctional programs?  What would some alternative outcomes be?

From a correctional and criminal justice systems perspective, it is certainly an important outcome to consider. The correctional and criminal justice systems are focused on punishing offenders and ensuring they do not offend again. As a result, it seems in some sense a natural extension of their mission to make the main measurement of their success or failure as an institution be focused on recidivism and how much they prevent it from happening. As Pettus-Davis and Kennedy (2021) point out, though, using recidivism as the _only_ measure of success causes tunnel vision to emerge when considering potential policies and programs for helping ex-offenders reintegrate back into society. In particular, for many ex-offenders recidivism takes the form of technical violations of the terms of their release rather than the actual commission of new crimes. This myopic focus only on recidivism, and in particular, technical violations leads to a neglect of other variables and factors which are also important for the successful reintegration of the ex-offender.

Pettus-Davis and Kennedy (2021) go through a litany of other potential outcomes which could be considered. The ones I think that are the most important are: 1) meaningful work trajectories and 2) positive social engagement plus positive social relationships. _Meaningful_ work trajectories are important as they allow individuals to find a sustainable source of legitimate income (cutting off the instrumental motivations for crime), and they also serve as a stake in conformity (the individual will not want to lose this important source of income). Work can also have redemptive properties through helping individuals realize their self-worth. The trickiest (and sadly most overlooked) part of this outcome is measuring the _meaningful_ part of the work trajectories. Individuals need to find value in their work and have opportunities for advancement and to make a livable wage. Individuals working in dead-end jobs which are not fulfilling or do not pay a living wage are likely not going to lead to positive outcomes. The second other important outcome to consider is positive social engagement and positive social relationships. From criminological theory, particularly differential association _and_ social control, focusing on these two outcomes provides ex-offenders with the best chance to recidivate.