---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim501 #death_penalty #deterrence_rational_choice #sentencing_courts 

**7) What does the National Academy of Science panel conclude about deterrence and the death penalty? Are you satisfied with this conclusion? What conclusion would you have pushed for if you had been on the panel?**

The National Academy of Science panel concluded that the deterrent effect (if any) of the death penalty was not discernible at the time of the report was published. They found the scientific evidence was not strong enough to make a reasonable justification one way or the other i.e. no conclusion could be reached. As a result, the research should not be used to inform policy deliberations on the matter of whether or not to allow the death penalty on deterrence grounds.

The panel found all research on the matter suffered from two main methodological issues. First, no research study was able to specify how much capital punishment deters offenders above and beyond other alternatives (e.g. life without parole). Stated another way, no research design has been able to demonstrate what would happen to crime rates absent the presence of the death penalty. Second, no research study at the time of publication had been able to accurately model how offenders conceptualize the risk of receiving the death penalty. [[Deterrence theory]] states would-be offenders will be deterred from committing crime by ensuring punishment is swift, certain, and severe. However, no research study was able to credibly demonstrate offenders considered the risk of receiving the death penalty _rationally_ i.e. in accordance with its actual propensity of being administered. An even larger issue, though, was that no research study was able to definitively demonstrate the _risk_ of being executed. Because death penalty cases are rare, idiosyncratic, and long, it’s hard to establish with any certainty one true _risk_ or _probability_ of receiving the death penalty. If researchers cannot establish the risk of receiving the death penalty, how likely is it that would-be offenders are _rationally_ or _correctly_ conceptualizing the risk themselves? The panel concluded it is not very likely. In conjunction, these two weaknesses of the research on the deterrent effects of the death penalty make it so that no general conclusion can be reached as to the deterrent effects of the death penalty.

I think I would agree with the general finding of the panel that no definitive conclusion could be reached as to what deterrent effect, if any, the death penalty has on would-be offenders. Because the issue is politically charged, it’s hard to say if I would be able to keep my political leanings out of the debate. I would be inclined to say the death penalty does not have any deterrent effects because I do not support the use of the death penalty. Additionally my intuition tells me that the death penalty does not have any substantive extra deterrence effects above and beyond punishments like life without parole. Because research is split as to the death penalty’s actual deterrent effect, though, I would probably err on the side of conservatism like the panel did and put my personal beliefs aside.

**3) What are ways in which sentencing guidelines constrain discretion? Do they need to be mandatory to do so?**

Before the introduction of [[Sentencing guidelines]] and the [[truth-in-sentencing]] movement, judges had fairly unchecked and unlimited discretion to sentence defendants however they saw fit. Judges then would give a wide range in terms of the length of the sentence, and then the actual length of time in jail/prison that the offender served would be left up to the parole board to determine. In some cases, the judge would not even give a range but simply a maximum amount of time the offender would be allowed to serve. It was up to the [[parole board]] to determine how long the offender actually served in jail/prison.

After the introduction of sentencing guidelines, this whole system changed in a lot of ways which served to check the discretion of judges but also parole boards if parole wasn’t outright abolished. For starters, judges did not give wide ranges anymore or just a maximum. Depending on the final charges set as part of the plea deal or discovered through the trial process (in conjunction with the offender’s criminal history), judges now _had_ to sentence in a very tight window of acceptable jail/prison lengths. To _depart_ from the sentencing guidelines required judges to provide justification as to why their unique case warranted a departure from the norms. Prosecutors and defense attorneys also could use the sentencing guidelines as bargaining chips during plea deal negotiations meaning judges lost a lot of their ability to sentence people as they saw fit. In addition to the constraining of judicial discretion, parole boards lost much of their discretionary power as well since in many states sentencing guidelines went along with _truth-in-sentencing_ which decreed offenders typically had to serve at least 85% of the sentence handed down in the courtroom. Parole boards, as a result, rarely led to the release of defendants anymore. In some states, parole boards were outright abolished.

Sentencing guidelines need not be mandatory either in order to constrain discretion. As mentioned above, prosecutors and defense attorneys often may use the guidelines as a baseline on which to base their negotiations, taking much of the sentencing power and discretion out of the hands of judges. Even if not mandatory, judges may feel compelled to go along with the guidelines if the guidelines were instrumental in establishing the going rates for their specific courtroom community.

**2) What are the theoretical linkages between formal and substantive rationality, focal concerns, and court communities in explaining sentencing outcomes?**

[[Formal rationality]] refers to a mode of thinking and rule-making in which the discretion of individuals is minimized to the highest degree possible. _A priori_ rules are created to cover all feasible use cases which may arise. In contrast to formal rationality is [[substantive rationality]] which allows for individuals to exercise their discretion as they see fit in a given situation. It will be largely driven by the values, concerns, and ideological belief of the individuals in charge of the decision-making process. This conceptual schema for understanding rulemaking in organizations sets the stage for understanding how courtrooms operate.

The [[court community perspective]] stresses the importance of local courts and the broader environment they are situated in. [[Court communities]] are a set of interdependent working relations dependent upon the goals, ideas, and attitudes of the individuals involved in the day-to-day workings and how those individuals and interactions are situated in the larger socio-political environment of the county, state, nation, etc. they are situated in. These individuals, in the course of working together, develop their own social orders ([[processual orders]]) leading to distinct cultures with their own _substantive rationalities_ (i.e. individualized concerns guiding the interpretation and application of the formal rules on the books). The [[focal concerns of courtroom actors]] are embedded in each of these localized court communities. The focal concerns perspective states that courtroom actors’ subjective definitions of offenders and their alleged offenses are based on three focal concerns of punishment: blameworthiness, protection of the community, and practical constraints. The _local substantive rationality_ developed in the _local court community_ informs what legal and extralegal considerations are considered by the courtroom actors which then in turn affect assessments of blameworthiness, dangerousness, and practical constraints.

To sum it all up, formally rational rules are imposed on courts usually from legislatures which are supposed to govern how courtrooms operate. _Local court communities_, though, interpret and apply these formally rational rules in locally-contextual ways which turn on the _substantive rationality_ formed in these local court communities. Courtroom actors and their focal concerns are shaped by the substantive rationality created in these local court communities.