---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim501 #prosecutors

1) Prosecutors have been called “the most powerful actors in the criminal justice system.” Do you agree? Could policy makers effectively control prosecutorial discretion? If so, how?

I agree that prosecutors are the most powerful actors in the criminal justice system. Powerful, here, meaning they most directly control the fate of the defendant and how much more (or not) they will become involved in the criminal justice system. The police are also incredibly powerful institutional actors who have immense influence and power over people, but I ultimately argue prosecutors are more important. While the police are the gateway into the criminal justice system, prosecutors are ultimately the ones responsible for how much more involved individuals will really become.

Within the courtroom, I argue prosecutors are also the most powerful actors. For starters, prosecutors have complete and unilateral power when it comes to making charge determinations. Charge determinations are largely immune from procedural review, legal challenges, and public oversight. Plea bargaining is also insulated from judicial review as well. With the advent of sentencing guidelines and related reforms,  prosecutors’ charging decisions gained immense power. Depending on the charges pressed, a very harsh or very lenient sentence might result (e.g. prosecutors had the power to press charges which would or wouldn’t trigger a mandatory minimum or three-strikes law). Prosecutors, as a result, gained immense bargaining power particularly in plea bargain negotiations. This incredible leverage has allowed prosecutors to arrange for more and more plea deals resulting in 90% - 95% of all criminal justice proceedings being resolved through a plea deal. It has also resulted in a more pronounced trial penalty emerging wherein defendants are punished more harshly for going to a trial than would otherwise might be expected.

Some steps could be taken to limit the power and discretion of prosecutors. Plea bargaining and charge determinations could be subject to some form of public oversight or judicial review. Public defenders could be given the same institutional importance and resources as prosecutors. As discussed in [[walkerTamingSystemControl1993]], reforms can be pursued which improve the functioning of prosecutor’s offices and more effectively screen out weak cases. This typically has led to much less _charge bargaining_ and more _sentence bargaining_ which leads to more judicial involvement and and less prosecutorial discretion.

4) Describe what different leadership styles of prosecutors there are. Also, explain what different prosecutor’s office organizational types there are. How do leadership styles and organizational types affect the ways “line” prosecutors do their day-to-day jobs?

The three types of prosecutorial leadership styles described in the Craft of Justice are: **insurgents**, **reformers**, and **conservators**. Typically a leadership style emerges as a result of two factors: **perceived status of the office** and **expected value of conflict**. If district attorneys (DAs) are happy with the status quo and the current level of power held by their office, they will be conservators. If the DA isn’t happy with the current level of power or the current status of their office, they will then become a reformer or an insurgent. Reformers differ from insurgents in that they believe conflict has a low expected value in terms of achieving what they want. While they want to change things, they are more willing to work with other stakeholders in the justice system to achieve those changes. Insurgents, meanwhile, place a high value on the expected value of conflict to achieve the change they seek. Unlike reformers, they have no qualms with fighting against other stakeholders and adopting an adversarial approach to achieve their goals.

Going along with the three prosecutorial leadership types are three organizational strategies where insurgents typically adapt their office into a **bureaucratic weapon**, reformers adapt their office into **efficient firms**, and conservators adapt their office into **reactive clans**. As with the leadership styles, the reactive clans strategy is the most dissimilar organizational strategy. Guided by the belief that the status quo is working and not much change is needed, DAs utilizing this strategy exercise little discretion over their assistant district attorneys (ADAs) and allow them to largely operate however they have been operating. Thus there is little guidance given as to what is expected in terms of charging standards and guilty plea guidelines, the internal hierarchy isn’t very rigid, and internal office efficiency isn’t very highly valued. In contrast are efficient firms and bureaucratic weapons. Both these organizational styles are more formally hierarchical and the monitoring of ADAs is much more strict to ensure compliance with the rules. The two mostly differ in the value they place on efficiency where bureaucratic weapons are not as concerned with efficiency (instead they are much more concerned with maximizing change in an adversarial fashion which may necessitate gumming up the works so to speak) and efficient firms, as their names indicate, are very concerned with achieving efficiency.

Leadership strategies and organizational styles have a large effect on day-to-day operations of ADAs, and it affects their relationships with other criminal justice actors. Reactive clans, because they are so hands off, allow for ADAs to go about their jobs however they see fit. This will mean, depending on the ADA, the same defendant will be charged more or less severely or will be subject to a harder/softer bargaining exchange. Efficient firms, meanwhile, tightly control ADA discretion, meaning charging standards and plea guidelines give ADAs little wiggle room in regards to cases as to how much they can actually do. However, efficient firms are open to feedback and will generally be willing to change practices based on what other courtroom actors feel. Bureaucratic weapons, though, generally will not change their practices and may double down on divisive practices if other courtroom actors do not go along with the changes. This can sometimes put ADAs in an unfortunate situation where they have to deal with the brunt of the ire from the other courtroom actors while being to do very little about it, and in fact, they may agree with the other courtroom actors as to the unreasonableness of the charges or the bargain being offered. Other times this can offer ADAs little outs, though, where they may agree with the chargers or the bargain but can use their boss as a _common enemy_ as to why things are the way they are.

5) Describe the relationships and influences between the federal department of justice and U.S. Attorney's offices. How responsive are U.S. Attorney's offices to directives from the DOJ, and what variations are there in this responsiveness?

The federal department of justice (DOJ) and U.S. Attorney’s offices have a unique relationship when it comes to the USA. Usually prosecutors are elected by the general population, but federal attorneys for the federal government are appointed by the President. As a result, federal attorneys serve at the pleasure of the President and can be fired for being seen as too insubordinate. Unlike in democratic elections where prosecutors may feel more or less emboldened to act as an insurgent, these institutional pressures suggest federal attorneys will be more compliant with the dictates of the DOJ. In particular, the DOJ will periodically issue memos outlining expectations and guidance as to what is expected of federal attorneys when it comes to charging decisions and plea bargaining (e.g. federal attorneys are expected to charge the highest level charges possible for certain types of crimes, _or_ federal attorneys are allowed to use their discretion as to what level of charges are most acceptable).

The Lynch et al. (2021) paper examines how responsive federal attorneys were to internal USA DOJ policy changes and found, overall, federal attorneys were responsive to policy changes with observable changes in behaviors of interest (i.e. average offense levels, use of binding mandatory minimums, and prosecutor endorsed downward departures). The average offense level and the use of binding mandatory minimums were typically the lowest and prosecutor endorsed downward departures were typically the highest during the President Obama + Attorney General (AG) Eric Holder era as the policies stressed during that time emphasized DA discretion and leniency for specific types of offenders. Meanwhile the trends reversed for the President Bush era + AG John Ashcroft eras and the President Trump + AG Jeff Sessions era as those offices were more focused on punitiveness.

There were also specific factors which moderated the effects of the policy memos. For starters, politics made a difference. Lynch found that court districts with Trump-appointed attorneys were sufficiently ideologically aligned with Trump + Sessions so as to reshape existing practices to become more punitive. Second, variations in the court communities and local district contexts caused substantial variation in outcomes. For example, the odds of receiving a judicial downward departure were higher in districts  with Trump-appointed attorneys. This suggests judges were attempting to use their discretion to combat what they viewed as the excessively punitive turn federal attorneys were pursuing. Another important factor was the percentage of defendants who were non-White with evidence suggesting non-White defendants under Trump + Sessions faced harsher sanctions for lesser crimes.