---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim501 #policing 

3) What are some different mechanisms by which policing can affect the amount of crime in a jurisdiction?

Policing is generally thought to reduce crime in a given area through two primary mechanisms: 1) [[Deterrence theory|deterrence theory]] and 2) [[Incapacitation effect]]. Deterrence combines the ideas of _guardianship_ and _general deterrence_. Guardianship (from [[Routine activity]] theory) is the idea that the presence of a police officer limits criminal opportunity offending opportunities for would-be offenders usually by increasing the costs of committing a crime. This guardianship role the police play has a _general deterrent_ effect on the broader population causing a decline in aggregate crime rates. Policing is also thought to reduce crime through incapacitation. The hypothesis being that a person who is caught, arrested, and then found guilty/pleads guilty was a criminal. If they had not been caught, they would have been in the community likely committing crime. Police officers, by arresting them which leads to them being incapacitated, reduced the future number of crimes which would have happened.

Of course, policing might increase crime in a neighborhood as well. Policing which is too aggressive can lead to mistrust forming between the community and the police. The community pulls back and will not call the police letting crime fester and spread. Alternatively incapacitation can have criminogenic effects where an individual incarcerated, when released, goes on to more crimes than they otherwise would have due to their incarceration. This could be because legitimate means of earning money have been closed off to them, or they have learned more efficient ways of committing crime while in jail/prison.

There is also the possibility policing is mostly reactive to crime and only has marginal effects on the rates of crime within a community. The true sources of crime (structural disadvantage and residential segregation) cannot be addressed through more/less policing. While the police can have an effect on the margins, they are ultimately an emergency short-term response to a structural long-term problem.

Police may largely be playing a reactive role to crime in neighborhoods. More disadvantaged neighborhoods will have more violent crime and homicides leading to more homicide arrests. There may or may not be some mitigation of some crime (very difficult to assess causality in these situations), but ultimately the long-term mitigation of homicides does not lie in policing.

4) It is no exaggeration to say that the entire criminal justice system depends on what kinds of decisions police make on the street.  What are some efforts to control police discretion and how have they fared?  What policy dilemmas does trying to control police discretion present?

Efforts to control the discretion of the police have historically faced a number of issues. Part of the issue is that policies designed to systematize and control discretion have intrinsic limitations in their ability to do so. Unforeseen circumstances or ambiguity in the rules will necessitate the individual enacting the policy to make a decision i.e. exercise their discretion. Additionally many of the readings we discussed have demonstrated the powerful effect policing culture has on its members leading to behaviors that circumvent the official rules on the books within police departments. Finally it is the case that policing is a profession, unlike many other professions, in which the employees encounter a huge variety of situations which are very hard to provide structure for ahead of time, and the police have a wide variety of approaches that they can take to resolve the situation. There are not many professions where an individual is expected to be able to deal with drug addiction, mental health crises, homelessness, and violent and nonviolent crime. Providing scripts and structure for how to deal with such a vast array of situations is difficult.

[[walkerTamingSystemControl1993]] describes two situations in which attempts were made to control the discretion of police officers. The first of which is deadly force. Walker claims it’s one decision point where there is persuasive evidence documenting a positive impact of new rules without any unintended negative consequences. The use of deadly force declined as police departments nationwide adopted stricter standards around the use of deadly force. Crime had not gone up as a result and officer safety was not compromised. Walker describes how there is even some evidence to suggest policing has gotten safer as a result of clearly defining when lethal force is or isn’t appropriate. Three factors are given as contributing to the success of the policies limiting police discretion around the use of lethal force: 1) lethal force is subject to reporting and reviewing requirements which ensures rules are actually followed, 2) they’re rare so it’s easier for police departments to adequately review them, 3) it’s an unambiguous standard for an unambiguous action i.e. life-or-death situations are _relatively_ more easily definable and lethal force is a strictly binary outcome.

The absence of these factors is what led to a failure in the second attempt to control discretion, mandatory arrests in domestic violence cases. For starters, the evidence is mixed and inconclusive as to if they really helped to deter future violence or not. Furthermore, the three factors which made policies effective in controlling lethal force were absent in this situation: 1) domestic violence calls/stops/arrests were not subject to reporting and reviewing requirements so it’s unclear how often officers followed the rules, 2) domestic violence cases are relatively common making it harder to review police actions, 3) defining _domestic violence_ is much more difficult than defining a life-or-death situation so it was ambiguous as to when the rules should even apply or not.

In conclusion, some control has been exerted over some police discretion. Police department policies have reduced the use of lethal force and have worked to limit their racially disparate impact. This is not to say police violence and police killings disproportionately against minority groups isn’t still an issue. The point is that improvements have been made while still acknowledging much work needs to be done. On the other hand, it’s unclear how effective, if at all, attempts have been to force police to arrest offenders in domestic violence cases. Moving forward, the key ingredients to successfully controlling police discretion are: 1) ensure officers report their actions and have appropriate mechanisms in place to review their actions, and 2) ensure the rules clearly define for which situations they do and do not apply.

5) Sociologist Patrick Sharkey stated in a June, 2020 article in The Atlantic that “one of the most robust, most uncomfortable findings in criminology is that putting more officers on the street leads to less violent crime.” If true, why is this claim one of the most uncomfortable findings in criminology? What are some other social consequences of more police presence and heavier policing of "high crime" areas?

I believe what Patrick Sharkey is referring to is the fact that it is often the case that the communities which have the highest levels of crime are also communities with the largest minority populations. Since criminology has found that putting more police officers on the street leads to less violent crime, one might suppose that a policy solution would be to put more police officers into minority communities. As recent events but also the long history of the USA has shown, there are other consequences of having a larger police presence and more proactive policing in high crime areas: 1) disproportionate contact and policing of minority groups and lower class groups leading to arrests for _crimes_ which otherwise would have gone unpunished (and tend to go unpunished in whiter, wealthier neighborhoods), 2) this disproportionate contact also leads to more violence and confrontation between community members and police officers causing mistrust to form, 3) the mistrust which forms between the police and the community they’re policing can ultimately undermine the crime-fighting role of the police because the community feels like it can no longer trust or rely upon the police to help them.

I would argue this isn’t an inherently uncomfortable finding, though. As a society we’ve largely foregone more effective solutions at reducing violent crime in the long-term i.e. policies aimed at alleviating poverty/concentrated disadvantage and reducing racial disparities. Furthermore, we have haphazardly added over the years more and more to the responsibilities of a police officer and have expected them to handle many of society’s contemporary problems: domestic violence, drug addiction, mental health crises, homelessness, sex trafficking, violent crime, and property crime just to name a few. These trends have come together in an explosively detrimental manner as many areas are left in concentrated disadvantage and racial segregation and are only given police ill-equipped to deal with their problems.

Creating a better police force will require a more careful accounting of the costs and benefits police officers provide and a comparison with other potential models of keeping communities safe and prosperous. We will always need some service to protect people from imminent harm, but does this need to be the same service which responds to drug addiction and homelessness and domestic abuse? Can we create alternatives to policing which better address these societal problems at a better cost (more benefits, less costs)? It behooves us to explore and better understand how to preserve the crime-mitigating aspects of policing while cutting out its negative aspects (i.e. police violence and brutality and the mistrust this breeds in communities).