---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim501 #jails #prisons

**3) What are distinct problems and demands faced by local jails?  What major gaps exist in our empirical understanding of jail incarceration?**

In contrast to prisons, jails have a much higher volume of people moving in and out of them. This can be attributed to the fact that: 1) jails are meant to house those who committed minor offenses as well as those being held on pretrial detention, 2) the vast majority of offenders perpetrate minor offenses, and 3) those who are convicted of a minor offense typically receive a shorter period of incarceration. Thus because most offenders commit minor crimes and because their punishments are comparatively mild, jails have more people moving in and out of them. It’s a more transitory population. This forms the basis of the problems jails face. They face the dual problem of attempting to balance their resources against the unpredictable flow of prisoners in and out of their facility. Facilities which are too large may go underutilized meaning wasted money and resources while facilities which are too small may lead to overcrowding. Jails must also deal with the fact they have less money with which to run themselves because they are typically funded from local city or county taxes and not from state taxes. Finally, a related problem jails must face is how to deal with the increasing amount of mentally ill people incarcerated in jails. Mentally ill people make up the overwhelming majority of the jail inmate population typically, and jails are particularly ill-suited to deal with the unique needs of the mentally ill population.

As the previous paragraph suggests, more empirical research is needed to understand what sorts of programming can be adopted into jails to help them best help their populations. In particular, more research is needed into how jails can adequately help their mentally ill population. However, a bit of editorializing, I am not certain jails are really the best place to house the mentally ill and likely new structures and programming are needed to best help them. A related avenue of research is to better understand how jails fit into the broader correctional landscape. How do they interact with police, court, and prison policies and practices? What is the relationship between jail population and the prison population i.e. how much formal or informal coordination is there between the two systems? Are they substitutes for each other or do they complement each other? How does the relationship change given the political context they are operating under? Finally, there is a large gap in our knowledge concerning what effect jails have on those incarcerated in them. Do they increase, decrease, or have no effect on the likelihood of recidivism? How are other aspects of their life impacted post-incarceration?

**1) From** _**Society of Captives**_**, what are "the defects of total power?" Are they generic to any social system of total power?**

Sykes (1958) succinctly sums up issues in the running and administration of prisons and the defects of total power. Theoretically and formally prison guards and administrators have nearly unlimited power over the prisoners and how they run the facility. From this point of view, it seems like it would be easy to maintain order as prisoners are under constant surveillance and are constantly being forced to follow a very strict schedule. However a dialectical process emerges wherein the total power wielded by the administrators comes to engender resistance by the prisoners thus necessitating even more power and control to be exerted over the prisoners which then yields more resistance, “The prison official, then, is caught up in a vicious circle where he must suppress the very activity he helps cause.” (Sykes pg. 22).

Another, more fundamental point, concerning the defects of total power is that power i.e. maximizing the probability that your rules will be followed, is not based on authority or the ability to leverage violence or a reward/punishment system for following the rules. Sykes makes the argument that power is instead based on a sense of _moral obligation_ and _sense of legitimacy_ by those who are having the power exerted over them. The ruled must believe their rulers have a _legitimate or rightful_ claim to their power, and they must also believe they have a duty or moral obligation to follow the rules because they believe it to be the right thing to do. Stated more plainly, the best way to ensure people follow the rules is to make them _want_ to follow the rules and not to force them into it i.e. _consensual obedience_. As Sykes points out several times, force is a very inefficient way of achieving compliance, and it simply cannot be meted out at all times for all infractions in an impartial manner. As pointed earlier as well, force and violence beget more force and violence on the part of prisoners thus the prison guards must learn to only use force and violence as a last resort. Because prison guards must earn the cooperation of the prisoners to maintain order and ensure they follow the rules, over time a subtle shift of power may take place wherein prisoners actually begin to hold the power in the relationship. A final important point Sykes makes is that this suggests better personnel are not going to fix the problem. The structure of prison itself is the underlying problem and what needs to be fixed. Links to [[Legal cynicism|legal cynicism]] and [[Procedural justice]].

We see a similar argument currently playing out in policing wherein many argue the organizational culture of policing is broken and replacing its personnel with _better personnel_ or more _diverse personnel_ is not going to fundamentally change things. They may help things on the margin but ultimately the structures of policing are going to compel officers to act in aggressive manner particularly towards minority citizens. Additionally we saw a similar dynamic play out when we studied the court system. There was (and is) a wide range in the rates of compliance with sentencing guidelines in courtrooms. Attempts by the legislature to exert more control over the courtroom was not a total success. Sentencing practices changed and the balance of power among courtroom actors shifted, but it was not uniform across courtrooms as some courtrooms simply learned how to get around the guidelines. Do these cases suggest that the defects in total power will always exist for any social system i.e. rule breaking will be common unless people feel a duty to follow the rules and believe in the legitimacy of their rulers? My initial reaction is to believe that this will hold true in most settings, but it may look quite different in different contexts. Autocratic regimes may rely more upon fear and order to convince people of their right to authority. There is also something to be said for propaganda, within Democratic regimes as well, for instilling obedience (even as the purpose of said propaganda may be to instill in the population a sense of legitimacy on the part of the ruling class). By and large, the defects of total power seems like it would in a large variety of settings, but I shy away from making universalistic claims given the diversity of humans and their experiences.

**4) Many people think of private prisons/corrections as a recent thing.  But what older historical examples exist of privatized correctional activities?  How might these have shaped the landscape of privatized corrections today?**

Private prisons existed as early as the 16th century in England wherein they were supposed to reform criminals through labor and discipline and operate in a self-sufficient manner so as not to cost the government any money for their administration. Usually these prisons funded themselves through fees levied on the prisoners themselves. Later on in the 17th and 18th century, England increasingly relied upon its colonies as a destination to export its prisoners to deal with the overcrowding that was occurring within its own prisons. What unfolded was a process very similar to slavery or indentured servitude where private providers would bid on prisoners and transport them to the colonies where they would then have them work. The owners would then reap the profits of their labor, and the government successfully rid themselves of the burdens of having to administer a prison population.

Interestingly many similar concerns of private prisons in the past have motivated the re-emergence of private prisons today (in the USA). There have been incredibly large increases in the prison population the past few decades straining state budgets and leading to dangerously overcrowded prisons. Additionally people are concerned that governments are inefficient or run things inefficiently and believe that private business could run things more efficiently thus saving the taxpayers money. This is all very similar to the situation in the 16th - 18th centuries wherein England was looking to save money and find a cost-effective solution to deal with the growing number of prisoners in their prisons.

While not unique to just private prisons, the emphasis that early private prisons placed on hard work and how it could: A) redeem the prisoner, and then B) help prevent them from falling back into crime once released seems to still exist in our current prison systems today. Prisoners are expected to work while in prison often for little to no pay. The work itself is believed to be redeeming, but it’s also supposed to, somehow, instill the values of hard-word and obedience in the prisoners so once they are released they will not fall back into offending. Additionally, in the best case scenario, prisoners would also learn a trade which would then help them find work once outside of prison.