---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim501 #sentencing_courts 

5) Explain the importance of lower courts. Explain ways in which they can exert social control outside the formal criminal punishment process.

The lower courts are important because they process the overwhelming majority of cases. For those who become involved with the criminal justice system, it is the part of the system they are most likely to encounter and deal with. The _reach_ of the lower courts, as a result, is much greater. Additionally, contrary to widely held perceptions, the lower courts exert quite a large amount of social control over defendants. Unlike the upper courts which typically exert social control through imprisonment or formal supervision (e.g. probation), the lower courts use a variety of more _informal mechanisms_. These informal mechanisms are still effective in managing marginalized populations.

[[kohler-hausmannMisdemeanorJusticeControl2013]] explains how lower courts operationalize penal power through informal mechanisms. She uses three conceptual schemas for doing so: **marking**, **procedural hassle**, and **the mandating of performance**. **Marking** is the process the criminal justice system employs for record-keeping purposes. It involves the generation, maintenance, and use of official records for individuals involved with the criminal justice system. Not only does it allow for the tracking of individuals within the criminal justice system, but it also allows for the tracking of individuals in the outside world. Second, is the **procedural hassle of case processing**. There are burdens and opportunity costs attendant to complying with the legal proceedings. These involve long waiting times and confusing processes. This leads to a lot of wasted time for defendants just spent waiting. Additionally they will often have to forgo working and spend funds getting to the courthouse and/or finding childcare leading to more inconveniences for the defendant. Third is the **mandating of performance**. This refers to evaluations done by courtroom actors to demonstrate the social control capacity of the CJ system, and it is used as evidence of responsibility or rehabilitation after the fact. This can involve things like paying fines, fees, or restitution or performing community service.

The management of marginalized populations is an important function of lower courts and as such they employ informal social control methods to _efficiently_ test and regulate these populations to ensure compliance with the rules and laws. The three conceptual schema illustrated by Kohler-Hausmann (2013) demonstrates how the lower courts exercise informal social control: marking, procedural hassle, and the mandating of performance. These informal social control methods allow criminal justice actors to trace, engage, and discipline subjects even as they’re formally shown leniency and release from penal control.

2) Explain four dimensions of court communities that are directly affected by court size.

Four dimensions directly affected by court size include: **the scope and nature of conflict**, **the organization of sponsoring organizations**, **the visibility of performance**, and **the role of mobilized interest groups**.

In regards to **the scope and nature of conflict**, small courtrooms tend to be relatively more harmonious and have less frequent conflict. This flows from the fact small courtrooms usually have the same people dealing with similar (or the same) clients over and over again breeding familiarity. Additionally small courtrooms tend to be very incredibly integrated into the community so lawyers and judges may know the client or the client’s relatives. All of these factors serve to dampen the frequency of conflict. However when conflict does arise, it tends to be quite intense and spillover into the surrounding community. Larger courtrooms tend to have more frequent conflict due to courtroom actors not necessarily knowing each other very well or their clients. However, formal institutional rules and more distance from the community ensure such conflict is always bounded and never escalates to severe heights.

Smaller courtrooms tend to have **less organized sponsoring organizations**. The smallness of the sponsoring organizations means they typically only have a few people working for them or, in some cases, only one individual. As a result, the level of bureaucracy and institutional organization needed to manage the cases does not need to be very high. In contrast, larger courtrooms may have dozens or even hundreds of individuals within and among the sponsoring organizations. To coordinate that many people, institutional organization, bureaucracy, and formal rules are needed. Problems, scheduling, coordinating, and managing conflict cannot be handled on an individual basis.

As mentioned before, smaller courtrooms tend to be more integrated with the local community. Additionally, they tend to have smaller caseloads. These two factors combine to give **high visibility** of the court’s performance to external members of the public and the media. When community members are likely to know the people involved in the court cases combined with their being very few court cases, it easily allows for individuals and the media to keep track of what’s happening and evaluate the performance of the courtroom actors. In contrast, larger courtrooms tend to have much **lower visibility**. They aren’t as well integrated with the local community meaning it’s very unlikely for a given individual to know somebody currently on trial/awaiting trial. Additionally, larger courtrooms have incredibly high caseload volumes making it hard for individuals and the media to keep up with the performance of the courtroom actors. Courtroom visibility, as a result, tends to only be amplified during high-profile cases which capture the attention of the public and the media.

Finally, there is the role of mobilized interest groups. Smaller courtrooms tend to reside in smaller communities with a less diverse set of interests and perspectives. As a result, these smaller communities and courtrooms tend to have **less mobilized interest groups**. Individuals also likely feel empowered enough to simply engage with the courtroom actors without seeing the need for creating an externalized group to create pressure. In contrast, larger courtrooms and larger communities tend to have **larger amounts of mobilized interest groups**. They represent a more diverse population with sometimes competing interests and perspectives. However due to the low visibility of the performance of the courts, mobilized interest groups typically are only able to exert their influence episodically and not continually.

3) Explain what it means to say that courts are "[[inhabited institutions]]."  Give examples from the readings.

**Inhabited institutions** refers to the perspective that institutions are inhabited by actors with agency (i.e. free will and discretion) and that the _collective_ working out of achieving organizational goals drives the organization. A closely related concept is the idea of **[[processual orders]]**. The processual order describes the mechanism by which local organizations adapt to and transform higher-order norms. It’s the informal social order which emerges from interactions (e.g. negotiation, persuasion, threats) between organizational participants. Norms and rules change through these interaction processes. An important implication of this perspective is that rules do not simply not simply come about through fiat and remain static. If they are imposed, the local processual order filters them through the local norms which have developed through the interactions of the individuals.

As applied to courts, this perspective offers up the idea that courts are distinctive processual orders based on participants’ interdependent working relations. Their interactions create norms which produce distinctly local organizational cultures which then go on to shape formal and informal case processing and sentencing norms. Some notable illustrations of this perspective come from several readings from class. Metcalfe (2016) demonstrates how increased similarity and familiarity between courtroom actors increases the odds of a plea disposition and decreases the amount of time it takes to reach that plea disposition (except in the case of defense attorney familiarity which actually increased the odds of going to trial). Hester (2017) demonstrates how a judicial rotation system in South Carolina managed to achieve uniformity in sentencing outcomes despite the state not having sentencing guidelines or any formal policies in place for achieving uniformity in sentencing outcomes across counties. Ulmer & Kramer (1998) demonstrate _directly_ how local courtroom norms and contexts lead to sentencing guidelines having differential effects. These studies all serve to demonstrate the inhabited institutions and processual order perspective as it relates to courts. In other words, every courtroom is a unique environment with its own distinctive rules and norms which have developed based on the interactions of the unique courtroom actors who work in that courtroom. Attempts to impose formal rules on courts will lead to differential (and sometimes unpredictable) effects as a result of these local cultures filtering the rules to meet their pre-existing norms.