Vanima is a [[Shabti]] construct created by the [[Primal Elves]] thousands of years ago. As the Primal Elven empire fell and disintegrated, I eventually fell into disrepair and stopped functioning. During the conflict between the [[the High Sylvan Legions]] and [[Wyr Sylvan]] of the present era, some High Elves came upon me while on a scouting party in Wood Elf territory. They were entranced by me and thought I would fetch a high price. They brought me back to camp where I eventually was brought back to the High Elf empire and sold as part of the spoils of war to raise money for the empire's war efforts. I was bought by a high elf collector of artifacts to be a part of his collection.

Unbeknownst to him (as well as all other modern elves and creatures), none knew I used to be a living being. Upon investigating me in conjunction with his other artifacts, he unknowingly reawakened me roughly 4 months ago. A voice in my head told me to escape [[Hildegaard]] so that is what I did. I was able to escape with no memories of who I am or what I used to be. As I roamed the world evading my old owner's attempts to capture me, I learned about the modern conflict between wood elves and high elves and how it expanded to encompass the humans and orcs. With no stakes in the conflict and without much attachment to any of the current factions or people, I roam the land trying to hide my unique presence (as I am presumably the only Shabti alive but also our existence has attained mythical status and few alive even suspected we ever existed) and evade my former owner.

I search the land trying to find out who I am and what my purpose is. I do what I must to survive and not to stand out or attract attention. I feel lost and deeply saddened at not having any identity or memories of what I am or who I was. On my way to a larger city to seek out any leads if anyone knows who I am or what I might be, I travel through the city our party is converging on.

I also have a barely living head of a [[Spriggan]] named [[Byagi Springweb]]. She was being kept as a fucked up torture plaything by a particularly sadistic High Elf Administratus engaged in *the Sprygwood trade*.

Essentially, as she has enlightened you over the last month of you traveling together, any Spriggans captured alive in raids are harvested for their sap and wood which have magical properties. Spriggans can regenerate their limbs, but slavers use cold iron bands to *cut off circulation* until the wood can be harvested while keeping them alive. These mills are being set up in occupied areas and border towns.
  
The lord in question, [[Antonius Gravalius]], has branded her with his slaver's mark on the back of her head and had taken great pleasure in using a cold iron straight razor to continually cut patterns into her face. Until you had killed him and absconded with her, she had a cold iron cap placed on the bottom of her neck that made it impossible for her to regenerate at all. The scars are still healing, though the brand is semi permanent from the inlaying of cold iron into the brand post burning.  
  
She would have helped you to understand the current war and struggles, and she wants to find people willing to help liberate these mills.