---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim_597_sentencing #sentencing_courts #plea_bargaining 

**1) How does the system of conviction and sentencing depend on the presence of at least some jury trials?**

If there were no jury trials available, defense attorneys would basically have no weapons at their disposal to keep prosecutors honest. Prosecutors are mostly concerned with racking up convictions rather it is through trials or guilty pleas. Guilty pleas are preferable since they tend to be faster and provide the ultimate certainty in terms of outcomes. The conviction was 100% secured in other words. Prosecutors, in general, tend to be willing to sacrifice a little bit of magnitude in terms of punishment to gain a lot in terms of certainty. Unlike pleas, trials carry with them uncertainty which means the defendant may be found not guilty. As prosecutors are evaluated on their rate of convictions, prosecutors try to avoid this outcome as much as possible.

During plea negotiations, prosecutors already have an enormous amount of leverage and power in setting the deal they want because they have an incredible amount of discretion in terms of the sentencing enhancements they can add or charge reductions or guideline departures they can offer. These factors can expose the defendant to a lot or a little in terms of punishment. Defense attorneys can only really play along and can only really work on preventing the charges from becoming worse, not better.

The one tiny thing keeping prosecutors a little bit honest is the fact the defendant may choose to go to trial. This increases the uncertainty for the prosecutor of securing the conviction, and it also means their caseload is going to slow down as they have to focus on preparing for the trial. Without the presence of at least some jury trials, what could the defense leverage to keep prosecutors honest?

If bench trials remained an option, this might mitigate some of the concerns listed above. It’s noted in the literature that at times judges can be more lenient than juries. It’s also not uncommon for defendants to file an open plea and take their chances the judge will give them a lenient sentence vs. trying to negotiate with a hard nosed prosecutor.

**2) Contrast the discussions in the Lynch readings with the “[[shadow of the trial]]” model discussed last week?**

The shadow of the trial model was very focused on a very abstract, theoretically rational representation of how defendants come to a plea agreement with the prosecutor. According to the model, defendants generally weighed the expected sentence if found guilty at trial with their probability of being found guilty. This weighted average trial sentence or expected trial sentence was to be met with a plea deal roughly equivalent in its punishment amount. There may be some deviations as defendants may be more or less risk-averse, and they may be some _costs_ of going to trial which make going to trial more costly than initially estimated. Overall though, plea deals should largely comport to the rationalized model.

In contrast, Mona Lynch contends plea deals are struck largely through coercion on the part of the federal prosecutors. Prosecutors largely know things will get much worse for the defendant at trial. Only about 12% of defendants who asserted their right to a trial were found innocent. Prosecutors also have a variety of options to greatly increase the punishment the defendants face if they think about going to trial: criminal history, relevant conduct, fact negotiations (e.g. the weight of drugs in drug cases), gun charges. Some of these sentencing enhancements can even prevent judges from departing from the guidelines. Even defendants who agree to cooperate can get burned if prosecutors ultimately find their cooperation wasn’t useful as cooperation often involves waiving your trial and procedural rights. Additionally cooperation can entail risks for the defendant in prison or for their families if other criminals seek retaliation.

In conclusion, the shadow of the trial model is a highly idealized model which assumes very rationalistic actions on the part of courtroom actors. I don’t think proponents of the model at all assume this is how plea bargaining works nor would they say that the model is trying to describe how plea bargaining works. Most proponents would argue, I imagine, it’s a benchmark for determining how rational the process really is. Mona Lynch, on the other hand, is trying to assess how plea bargaining actually happens and what goes into crafting the inputs into the shadow of the trial model: the expected length of the sentence if found guilty at trial and the probability of conviction. As her research points out, prosecutors have a variety of tools at their disposal to greatly expose the defendant to even more punishment should they not agree to plead guilty. This would change the calculus for them as to what an acceptable plea bargain would like given the much harsher sentence they’d be expecting to face. Mona Lynch is also very concerned with how plea bargaining has become coercive which the shadow of the trial model cannot really contend with since the shadow of the trial model is agnostic concerning how the expected sentence length and probability of conviction are determined which will very much depend on the bargaining process (e.g. fact negotiations, charge reductions, guideline departures).

**3) The Shermer and Johnson reading, like several readings last week, focuses on charge reductions as a key component of plea bargaining. Given the readings this week, such as those by Ulmer et al., Spohn and Fornango, Bradley et al., and, of course, Lynch, do you think that charge reductions/bargaining are _overemphasized_ in the prosecutorial discretion literature?**

I don’t think charge reductions/bargaining are overemphasized in the literature. The Shermer & Johnson piece highlights how, overall, there does not appear to be racial disparities in charge reductions although there is some sex disparity as men appear to be disadvantaged. Racial disparities did emerge when they grouped their data by offense type suggesting racial disparities may operate in a more pernicious way than originally anticipated. This is in of itself an interesting finding which could spawn other interesting and useful research.

Given the readings we had this week and last week, it would appear as if charge reductions are appropriately emphasized. Each of the readings examined the many different aspects in which prosecutors can exercise their discretion and how disparity may or may not appear and then how it influences further decisions and actions down the pipeline.

For example, Mona Lynch examined the totality of the plea bargaining process through qualitative research and explained the many different ways federal prosecutors exercise their discretion and power (e.g. criminal history, relevant conduct, fact negotiations, and weapon charges). Spohn & Fornango examined how the use of substantial assistance departures vary across prosecutors net of individual-level defendant/case characteristics and net of court-level characteristics finding small but statistically significant variation in prosecutorial use of the departures with most variation being explained by legally relevant factors and a smaller amount of variation being explained by extralegal factors. Ulmer, Eisenstein, & Johnson examined how much of the trial penalty was explained by various types of guideline departures and found meaningful trial penalties remained even after accounting for them. Bradley-Engen et al. found a substantial effect for time where defendants (regardless of being disposed of through trial or plea) faced harsher punishments the longer it took to arrive at a conviction.

In conclusion, it appears as if there is a wide variety of research being done on prosecutorial discretion and how it operates in a variety of avenues throughout the criminal justice system. Charge reductions are an important part of the landscape and appear to take up a reasonable amount of the research agenda.