---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim_597_sentencing #sentencing_courts #risk_assessment

1) The focal concerns perspective is used in most of the readings in this section.  What differences are there in how it is used?  To what extent do the critiques raised by [[lynchFocallyConcernedFocal2019]] apply or not apply to the articles by Johnson et al., Johnson and Kurlychek, Painter-Davis and Ulmer, and Light?

I wouldn’t say there are differences in how the [[focal concerns of courtroom actors]] perspective is used in each of the readings. It is more the case that each of these papers emphasizes different characteristics of the defendants which had previously been unexplored. In exploring them, the authors seek to understand how disparity might emerge conditional on that characteristic and then how that feeds into the focal concerns of the judges.

- Johnson & Kurlychek examine how being a juvenile in adult court affects guideline departures. They find being a juvenile makes upward departures more likely and more harsh in Pennsylvania, and it makes upward departures as well as downward departures more harsh in Maryland. Using judge provided written responses as to why they departed from the guidelines, they find youthfulness is often cited as a mitigating factor but may also sometimes be an aggravating factor. More research would be needed to understand why it’s a mitigating factor sometimes and other times an aggravating factor (as the quantitative results suggest). This ties into focal concerns as it illustrates judges consider youthfulness when assessing actions like blameworthiness as well as practicality.
    
- Light examines how citizenship affects the likelihood of incarceration as well as the sentence length in the USA and in Germany. He finds noncitizens receive a penalty wherein they’re more likely to receive incarceration and conditional on being incarcerated they’re more likely to receive a larger sentence. Interviews with judges reveal why this might be the case (e.g. judge resentment of immigrants violating host country’s hospitality and immigrants lacking social bonds). It also reveals differences in how judges between the USA and Germany sentence individuals: German judges view incarceration more as a last resort, and German judges tend to minimize their individual preferences when applying the law. In terms of focal concerns, the research illustrates differences between countries in how judges conceptualize their focal concerns, and it also illustrates commonalities in how judges in both countries view non-citizenship as an aggravating factor (i.e. non-citizens are believed to be more blameworthy and more dangerous/more at risk of recidivating).
    
- Johnson et al. examines how disparities manifest themselves in the Netherlands judicial system by testing a variety of hypotheses which have substantial support in the USA (e.g. young, male, minorities will be treated more harshly, those victimize females and nationals will be treated most harshly). They find overall support for their hypotheses suggesting the focal concerns of judges in both countries are similarly influenced by the measured factors. Additionally they examine what effect prosecutorial sentencing recommendations have on the judges’ sentencing decision and find prosecutorial recommendations are strongly positively correlated with the judge’s sentencing decision. In terms of focal concerns, this suggests judges are taking substantial cues from the prosecutors when it comes to assessing blameworthiness and dangerousness. It may also be a nod to practicality constraints where judges will largely agree with prosecutors to ensure cases make their way through the docket.
    
- Painter-Davis & Ulmer examine how racial/ethnic disparities in upward and downward departures change when considering if the upward or downward departure is for intermediate punishments (IPs). They find the disparities widen when the departure is for an intermediate punishment suggesting judges view race and ethnicity negatively when assessing suitability for rehabilitation. Importantly the authors suggest rehabilitation should potentially be considered a separate, distinct focal concern with its own specific considerations separate from blameworthiness, dangerousness, and practicality.

The Johnson & Kurlychek and Light pieces suffer the least from Mona Lynch’s criticisms. The Light piece uses interviews with judges to directly address the question of what were judges thinking about when considering the cases before them. Retrospective observational regression analyses cannot be used to infer judge intentions or considerations. Similarly the Johnson & Kurlychek piece uses what judges wrote about why they departed from the guidelines to gain some insight into how judges think about their cases. However, it isn’t as good as interviews since they do not gain insight into what judges consider when they _do not_ depart from the guidelines.

The Johnson et al. piece partly addresses a piece of Mona Lynch’s criticism which is that most sentencing studies which employ focal concerns don’t include information concerning prosecutorial discretion and treat judges as the sole deciding factor for determining the sentence. By modeling the effect the prosecutor has on judges, Johnson et al. create a more realistic model of the courtroom which acknowledges the fact that courtrooms are made up of a variety of interacting actors who influence each other. Their research though cannot get at directly what judges and prosecutors are thinking about when they’re considering what sentence to give.

Painter-Davis & Ulmer suffer the most from Lynch’s criticism as it employs retrospective observational regression analyses which as stated above cannot be used to infer judge intentions or considerations. Their results are consistent with the hypothesis that judges use a defendant’s race/ethnicity when determining their rehabilitative potential, but their results alone cannot prove such thought processes happen.

2) Risk assessment is a growing approach to sentencing. What are some benefits and pitfalls with regard to disparity with building risk assessment into sentencing policies such as guidelines? From a disparity standpoint, would formal risk assessment tools be preferable to the subjective assessments of the focal concern of "community protection/dangerousness" made by judges and prosecutors?

As [[laskorunskyAssessmentOffenderRisk2017]] mentions, risk assessment tools have different goals from [[Sentencing guidelines|sentencing guidelines]]. Sentencing guidelines were meant to impose uniform sentences despite differences in personal characteristics. Risk assessment tools are supposed to incorporate personal characteristics to craft _more effective_ sentences (usually operationalized as reducing recidivism). It’s unclear as a result how risk assessment tools would interact with guidelines since the two are in many ways incompatible. It’s also unclear how risk assessment tools, if used for sentencing, would be used and deployed by judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and other courtroom actors. How would it change the courtroom context?

Risking redundancy, it’s unclear how risk assessment tools would impact disparities. Theoretically it’s possible they might reduce disparity as they make it clearer to judges and other courtroom actors certain variables are not correlated with recidivism (e.g. offense severity). If these variables are correlated with race, it’s possible they can play a role in reducing disparity. However if the risk assessment tools find certain variables are correlated with recidivism (e.g. criminal history), and these variables _are_ correlated with race, this would increase disparity.

[[Risk assessment]] tools could prove useful and preferable to human decision-making as it would standardize the decision-making process. When viewed this way, risk assessment tools can be seen as _broader_ equivalents to sentencing guidelines. They’re broader in the sense that they systematically incorporate more variables when coming to a decision vs. guidelines which typically consider a much narrower range of variables (and for a different purpose). Given some set of characteristics, all these individuals should be assigned the same risk by the tool. This can be contrasted with human decision-making where there may be more variability in their risk assessment even when holding some set of characteristics constant. Insofar as it’s easier to audit and understand a standardized system, it would be easier to understand where bias is creeping as well as how to rectify it. Human decision-making is not as easily audited nor is it as easily rectifiable. The beauty of human decision-making, though, is that there may be valid reasons for the variability in risk assignment even when some set of characteristics are the same because some unaccounted for variable in the model is at play.