
---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim_597_sentencing #sentencing_courts 

**1) What are the key arguments of the “[[inhabited institutions]]” perspective as it pertains to courts and sentencing. Give three examples of gaps in our knowledge about sentencing and policy that could be filled by research using this perspective.**

Every organization has formal norms or rules they are supposed to follow. However organizational goals and interests often clash leading to prioritization and interpretation which happens at a local level meaning subdivisions of that organization will have their own localized adaptations and selective following of the formalized rules. Who or what drives this process of selective rule following? In courtrooms it’s the courtroom actors with the emphasis placed on the judge, the prosecutor, and the defense attorney. These actors have agency or free will to carry out the formal rules as they interpret them. Repeated interactions among these actors creates an informal social order with its own informal norms and rules. This is the set of assumptions which undergird the _inhabited institutions perspective_ of courts and sentencing.

Gaps in our knowledge which this perspective can help to fill:

- Much current research focuses on predicting or explaining a sentencing decision through the use of multivariate regression modeling. While this approach is useful for establishing disparities exist, they cannot be used to determine where in the sentencing process such disparity arises nor can it be used to determine which actor(s) are responsible for such disparity arising. The inhabited institutions perspective argues discretion is distributed and arises from interactions between courtroom actors. Multi-method research is needed to establish why and how such disparities arise.
    
- More research could be done to establish what produces court similarities and court differences within states and between states. The inhabited institutions perspective argues local context matters in conjunction with how it interacts with larger, overarching formal rules. Multi-method research can help establish why differences exist between and among states when it comes to adherence in the formal rules. Quantitative methods are useful for establishing such differences exist while qualitative methods are useful for establishing why such differences might exist.
    
- Related to the above point, the inhabited institutions perspective also suggests actors learn and change and adapt to new situations which emerge in the courtrooms. As these new situations emerge, the informal rules and norms may no longer work and as a result a new set of informal rules and norms have to be worked out in the same interactive process. Longitudinal quantitative studies would be interesting to see how sentencing practices change over time and in response to different external stimuli. Qualitative studies would be useful too to give context to the quantitative results, but it might be hard to do on a long enough time scale to be able to see the changes happening.

**2) We've talked (and will talk** **again) about racial/ethnic group threat, racial and ethnic composition, in conditioning local sentencing.  But what are some other potentially important external influences from the larger community on local court community norms and sentencing practices?**

The prevailing political ideology is an important external influence from the larger community which can affect local court community norms and sentencing practices. Generally speaking liberals tend to be more lenient and focused on rehabilitation while conservatives tend to be more harsh and focused on punishment and deterrence. Judges, prosecutors, and public defenders are usually elected in democratic elections so as a result the ideology of the region will affect the local court community and the norms it develops.

The Hester piece had an interesting finding where prosecutors from wealthier and more urban counties were more aggressive and generally sought more punitive sentences (in the state of South Carolina). The qualitative interviews with judges led to the hypothesis that because prosecutors are funded through their county government, the wealthier and more urban counties could provide more resources to the Attorney General so as to have more prosecutors and to be able to be more aggressive with their cases since they more able to go to trial and strike harder bargains.

Hester notes this is a counterintuitive finding given that most research finds more urban counties to be less strict and not more strict. In the Kramer & Ulmer piece they did indeed find larger counties were more likely to grant departures from the guidelines. Allegheny County (which houses Pittsburgh) and Philadelphia County in particular were most likely to grant downward departures.

It would appear as a result the size, urbancity, and wealth of a county play an important role in the development of that county’s local courtroom culture. It doesn’t appear as if the effect is the same in every state though. The observed differences between PA and SC aren’t strictly incompatible though. It may be the case that prosecutors in Philadelphia and Allegheny county are also more aggressive, but they’re less successful. It may also be the case that despite the relative wealth of the counties, the prosecutors’ offices aren’t receiving that much more resources. The differences could also be real, however, where increased likelihood of departures is also evidence of less aggressive prosecutors. If that’s the case, perhaps the presence of sentencing guidelines in PA while their absence in SC may explain some of the difference. As Hester also notes, the urban counties in SC are much, much smaller than the urban counties in PA so it may not be a totally balanced comparison.

**3) What are some effects of courtroom workgroup familiarity and stability?  How might you measure this familiarity/stability?**

Metcalfe in her paper addressed the hypothesized and observed effects of workgroup familiarity/stability and similarity. It is hypothesized increased familiarity and similarity between courtroom actors should facilitate cooperation leading to an increased likelihood of a guilty plea and a shorter time to disposition. Shared experiences and characteristics should lead to agreement concerning goals and cooperation in achieving those goals, namely the reduction of uncertainty and increase in efficiency (processing of cases). Since trials are antithetical to these goals, guilty pleas become the preferred outcome.

However Metcalfe’s observations run partially contrary to the hypothesis. Familiarity between the judge and prosecutor was associated with higher odds of a plea deal and shorter times to disposition (as measured by the dummy variable). This was not the case for defense attorneys. Familiarity either had no impact or led to a decrease in the odds of a plea deal. These findings should be taken with a grain of salt though due to data issues where only a sample of cases were selected. Had all cases been used, a more accurate representation of familiarity would have been represented.

Similarity functioned as hypothesized though. More dissimilar workgroups generally had lower odds of reaching a plea deal and longer times to disposition. Same-sex workgroups generally had higher odds of reaching a plea deal and shorter times to disposition.

Metcalfe offers a good starting point on how to measure familiarity/stability and similarity. Familiarity is measured as the number of times the actors appeared together before for a case (or if they appeared together at all when made into a dichotomous variable). Further qualitative research might discern the nature of the relationships/familiarity by observing _how_ the actors interact with each other in the courtroom. Survey research could be used to get more quantitative data about the opinions certain courtroom actors have about each other in addition to how much time they spend with each other outside of the courtroom. Metcalfe also offers a good starting point for measuring similarity as she uses law school, race, sex, and experience. I think political ideology would be an important dimension to add as well when considering similarity amongst courtroom actors. The nature of their jobs is very political, and one’s political beliefs will invariably shape how one approaches the job of administering the law. It seems plausible that working with those people with different political ideologies can serve to introduce friction into the courtroom setting.