---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim_597_sentencing #sentencing_courts #plea_bargaining #prosecutors 

**1) Explain the key propositions of the “[[shadow of the trial]]” model of plea bargaining. Do you think this is a valid or realistic description of plea bargaining?**

The _shadow of the trial_ model argues defendants plead guilty if the offered sentence is less than or equal to the expected value of their trial. The expected value of their trial is a weighted average of the possible results. For example, if it was estimated that the defendant had a 0.7 chance of being found guilty which would result in a 10-year sentence, this would lead to an expected value of 7 years for their trial (0.7 * 10 + 0.3 * 0). If the defendant were offered a 7-year plea deal, the shadow of the trial model would argue the defendant would take the plea deal as it is functionally equivalent to the expected value of the trial. The model would call these types of defendants **risk neutral**.

The model also allows for **risk seeking** and **risk averse** defendants. In the above example, a risk seeking defendant would not take the plea deal and would prefer to take the gamble of the trial. It would take a shorter plea deal sentence to convince the risk seeking defendant to not go to trial. On the other hand risk averse defendants prefer to avoid the uncertainty of the trial and would accept an even longer plea deal sentence than the one offered in the example.

The model seems plausible, and the results from the paper suggest lawyers are using some version of the shadow of the trial model to craft their plea deal sentences. However the models are usually only able to explain about half of the variation which suggests there other factors affecting how plea deal sentences are crafted. In other words, it seems very likely the probability of conviction and the expected sentence length of a trial factor into the specific plea deal sentence, but other factors like the characteristics of the defendant and the specific courtroom actors involved in the case would contribute to the eventual plea deal sentence as well.

**2) Compare and contrast the findings of the Kutateladze study with what the shadow of the trial model would predict.  Is the Kutateladze study relevant to the shadow of the trial model?  Do the findings support it?**

The Kutateladze study examined how cases evolved across three specific _decision_ _points_: case screening, arraignment, and final disposition. Specifically the study looked at how prosecutors would change the charges they were considering filing across the three decision points and how the race of the defendant interacted with the nature of how the charges changed. The high level findings indicated African-Americans/Latinxs defendants were **more** likely to have charges reduced at screening (as well as being more likely to have charges increased), but they were **less likely** to have charges reduced (or changed at all) during arraignment and disposition. Alternatively White and Asian defendants were **more likely** to have their charges reduced at final disposition while their charges were **less likely** to be changed during the case screening process. The study argues the timing of these changing charge patterns are ultimately a benefit for White and Asian defendants as it allows for more generous plea deals to emerge for White and Asian defendants as a result of their charges being lowered versus African-American/Latinx defendants whose charges are only ever dropped during processing and not during disposition as part of a plea bargain.

The _shadow of the trial_ model is compatible with the study’s findings in some ways. A proponent of the shadow of the trial model would grant the expected probability of conviction and expected sentence length will change depending on the charges being pressed, the criminal history of the defendant, and the strength of the evidence. As a result, there may be _racial differences_ in the plea deals being offered, but this will be due to racial variation in charges being pressed and racial variation in criminal history. The underlying mechanism of how plea sentences are crafted remains the same. The shadow of the trial model takes a very _narrow_ focus on a single aspect of the criminal justice decision making namely how plea decisions are arrived at conditional on everything else which came before it (including what charges are being pressed).

Opponents of the model (and this study I would imagine) would argue the shadow of the trial model is too narrowly construed namely because what charges will be pressed are often a critical part of the plea bargaining process. Subsequently because the expected sentence length at trial and the probability of conviction vary with the charges being pressed, there must be other considerations and variables at play which determine the final charges to be pressed which would then go on to determine (likely in accordance with the shadow of the trial model) what the sentence length of the plea deal would be. As this particular study argues, the race of the defendant appears to be one of those other considerations/variables in this process.

**3) Describe** **how prosecutors’ power and influence have changed over the past 40 years. How has this change affected plea bargaining and trial taxes/penalties?  How do sentencing guidelines (federal and/or state) give prosecutors tools to gain plea bargaining leverage?**

During the 1960s and 1970s, sentencing reform was on the agenda in many states as well as at the federal level. Liberals were concerned with disparities in the criminal justice system and believed excessive judicial discretion was the primary culprit as to why that was the case. Conservatives were concerned with the fact that judges were too lenient, and their discretion needed to be reigned in and more guided. This ushered in the sentencing guidelines reform movement along with various other sentencing reforms (e.g. truth-in-sentencing, mandatory minimums, and three-strike laws) which had the cumulative effect of reducing judicial discretion.

Prosecutors gained an immense amount of power as a result of these reforms. To understand how they gained power, one needs to understand prosecutors have complete and unilateral power when it comes to making charge determinations. Charge determinations are largely immune from procedural review, legal challenges, and public oversight. Furthermore the Supreme Court insulated plea bargaining from judicial review as well. With the advent of sentencing guidelines and related reforms, the ability for prosecutors to choose what charges they were pressing gained immense power because it often meant the difference between a very harsh sentence and a very lenient sentence (e.g. prosecutors had the power to press charges which would or wouldn’t trigger a mandatory minimum or three-strikes law). Prosecutors, as a result, gained immense bargaining power particularly in plea bargain negotiations.

Prosecutors over the past 40 years have been able to leverage their increased power to strike more and more plea deals which has resulted in 90% - 95% of all criminal justice proceedings being resolved through a plea deal. It has also resulted in a more pronounced trial penalty emerging wherein defendants are punished more harshly for going to a trial than would otherwise might be expected.