---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim_597_sentencing #sentencing_courts 

1) a) What are the focal concerns of sentencing? b) What are some sub-concerns that fit within each one? That is, what other specific sentencing considerations might fit within each focal concern?  c) Can you think of any additional focal concerns of sentencing that are not covered by the ones in the readings?

The [[focal concerns of courtroom actors]] perspective of sentencing is a model of criminal justice decision-making in which decisions are by individual court actors’ based on their own subjective definitions of offenders and offenses. These definitions are based on three _focal concerns_ or three criteria which the punishment is supposed to serve. One is blameworthiness (how much at fault is the offender for the crime committed), another is protection of the community (how dangerous is the offender perceived to be, how likely are they to offend again), and the last one is practical constraints (jail/prison space, is the offender responsible for any defendants).

Within blameworthiness, the situation surrounding the commission of the crime would be taken into account. For example, if the crime was drug possession then the individual may be assessed as less culpable because they were acting out of addiction. If the individual was poor and committed a crime out of poverty to sustain themselves, the individual may be assessed as less culpable as well. Within dangerousness, the type of crime committed as well as the individual’s criminal history will be considered. If the current crime was violent and the individual has a long history, they may be assessed as being very dangerous to the community. Closely tied to dangerousness is also the idea of amenability to rehabilitation and treatment. Perhaps the individual did commit a violent crime, but they have no prior record and have demonstrated their willingness to atone. They may then be assessed as not so dangerous and able to be rehabilitated rather than strictly punished. Finally within practical constraints as mentioned above there are a variety of practical considerations which come into play. How much room is there in local jails and prisons? Is the offender responsible for any dependents? The judge may also consider the practical utility of sending the offender to jail/prison if they think for whatever reason the offender is likely to be worse off being sent to jail/prison.

A focal concern not addressed in our readings is that of restitution to the victim and/or community harmed by the crime. It seems important to me the victim (as well as the offender) are made whole again. I don’t mean revenge either on the part of the victim. I’m talking about considering a _punishment_ or service which actively works to correct the harm done and restore the humanity lost on the part of the offender and victim. This to me seems like it should be an important consideration when sentencing.

2) What are some images of defendants that equate social statuses with danger and criminality?  How would these shape the interpretation of focal concerns?

One particular finding which continually came up again and again in the readings was young, black, men were consistently found to be the most harshly punished. This finding was connected to the focal concerns perspective as young, black, men were often portrayed as being incredibly dangerous in the media which in turn leads to stereotyping on the part of the white public. In sentencing, judges would fall back on these stereotypes when making assessments of dangerousness. Going along with the media portrayal of young, black, men as dangerous, young black men are also often portrayed as not having many connections to their social community or not having many social bonds. As a result, courtroom actors see there being less practical constraints on incarcerating young, black, men.

Gender is also a factor which shapes courtroom actors’ focal concerns. Women are typically seen as less blameworthy for crimes. Some of this is due to apparently legitimate differences in the roles men and women play in crime. Typically women serve auxiliary roles in the commissioning of crimes, they don’t commit as much serious crime, and they don’t have as lengthy priors. These factors contribute to women being seen as less blameworthy and as less dangerous. Additionally women often are the primary caregivers for dependents in their family, and they are seen as being pillars of support for their community. As a result, judges are less likely to sentence women for fear of the negative effects it would have on the wider community and dependents.

3) What is the "liberation hypothesis?"  Do you find it plausible?  How would it relate to the focal concerns perspective?

The _[[liberation hypothesis]]_ states that as the seriousness/visibility of a crime increases, discretion is tightened and decision making becomes limited to legally relevant variables. Extralegal variables (e.g. race, gender, socioeconomic status) will not be as pertinent in the decision making process according to the hypothesis. This is generally believed to happen because the seriousness of the crime at hand or the extensive criminal history will outweigh other concerns. Less serious/visible cases increase discretion and consideration of extralegal variables. This is because there is greater ambiguity as to what the _right_ sentencing decision is. Judges will then feel _liberated_ to construct a sentence based on a variety of contextual, extralegal factors.

A priori the hypothesis certainly seems plausible. I could see the hypothesis potentially failing in states with presumptive sentencing guidelines though. Theoretically all crimes, low-level and high-level, would have sentences associated with them curbing judicial discretion in all instances. I would also be interested in how the hypothesis is defining _serious_ crimes. It may very well be the case that factors such as race and gender color in the judge’s mind how serious a particular crime is. E.g. the same charge for a white offender might be viewed as more serious for an African-American offender. I would also imagine the characteristics of the victim play a role in determining for the judge how serious the crime is.

The liberation hypothesis relates to the focal concerns perspective in how it structures judges’ views as to how dangerous an offender is perceived to be. For more serious crimes, the hypothesis would predict judges would predominantly look to the offender’s prior record and current offense for assessing dangerousness. For less serious crimes, the hypothesis would predict judges would predominantly look at other characteristics of the offender to gauge dangerousness. Such factors would include but not be limited to age, race, gender, and socioeconomic status. The liberation hypothesis may also argue the focal concerns take different degrees of precedence for high-level vs. low-level crimes. For high-level crimes, preventing a dangerous person from going back into the community may become the overriding concern while for low-level crimes blameworthiness and practical constraints may become more salient.