---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #crim_597_sentencing 

1) Selection is an endemic problem in studying the criminal justice system and its decision making. What are some major problems posed by selection in sentencing research, and how have scholars dealt with them? To what extent can the problem of selection in sentencing research be "solved"?

[[selection bias]] occurs when there are systematic differences between the sample being studied and the population of interest whom researchers hope to generalize their findings to. In sentencing research, the only people who ever get selected into the _sample_ are those sentenced. We don’t observe hypothetical sentences for those not sentenced. The thinking goes there is something potentially (probably) systematically different between those sentenced and those not sentenced. When a research paper hypothetically claims, “African-Americans are, on average, sentenced 3 months longer than White-Americans” it’s unclear how well this finding would generalize to the broader population outside of incarcerated individuals. A related issue is sentencing research rarely makes explicit the population it’s trying to generalize to. Would it hold for all African-Americans vs. White-Americans? All arrested African-Americans vs. White-Americans? Most commonly it seems that it’s implicitly assumed it would hold for all convicted African-Americans vs. White-Americans.

Researchers have traditionally dealt with this issue using quantitative methodological adjustments. Most commonly used is the “Two Part Model” wherein selection into the sample is modeled using a probit estimator. This is then followed up with the substantive OLS regression which represents the influence of the independent variables on the dependent variable conditional on being selected into the incarcerated population as modeled by the probit.

It is often the case, though, the Two Part Model isn’t realistic because there will often be factors influencing selection into the sample which also affect the substantive outcome of interest (e.g. class). The Heckman correction is often employed as a means of addressing this issue, but there are no free lunches since this correction can introduce severe multicollinearity and very large standard errors.

In Bushway, Johnson, and Slocum (2007), they ultimately make the argument that while these methodological adjustments and techniques have their place, they’re not magical solutions to the problems of selection bias. Sometimes the best approach is to appreciate the limits of your approach and acknowledge selection bias hampers the generalizability of your results. Deep theoretical and domain knowledge of the object of study could lead to the discovery of suitable exclusion restrictions (variables which affect selection into the sample but do not affect the substantive outcome of interest). At the end of the day though, selection bias is here to stay. It can be managed and addressed, but it can never be made into something which isn’t a concern.

2) Explain the distinction between “Type A” and “Type B” discretion. What are their different implications for sentencing disparities? How would you study them differently?

**[[Type A Discretion]]** is the discretion of individual actors to make decisions within a set of laws and rules. Decision-makers have to make decisions and interpretations based on (inherently) imprecise rules. In the criminal justice system judges, prosecutors, and police officers are tasked with enforcing the rules and laws set by the government. However there is an enormous amount of discretion they can exercise as to how much or how little certain rules will be enforced against certain groups of people but not others and in certain situations but not others. **[[Type B Discretion]]** is the crafting of laws and setting of rules in the first place usually by some legislative body.

The types of disparities which can emerge under Type A and Type B discretion have different implications. Holding Type A discretion constant and examining only the effect of Type B discretion would be akin to asking the question, “How fair are the rules?” In other words, were the rules designed in such a way (intentionally or unintentionally) so that they disadvantage certain groups over other groups? Holding Type B discretion constant and examining only the effect of Type A discretion would be akin to asking the question, “Are the criminal justice actors enforcing the laws fairly across different groups?” In a nutshell, disparities emerging from Type B discretion are due to unfair laws while disparities emerging from Type A discretion are due to unfair application of the law.

Of course one can have unfair laws which are applied fairly. For example, some argue using criminal history as a means of increasing criminal punishment is unfair towards minority groups who tend to have longer criminal histories than Whites. However unfair this law may be, it can be applied _fairly_ given that everyone who appears before the judge (regardless of race) has their criminal history treated the same. One can also have fair laws which are applied unfairly. For example, prosecutors may systematically be charging white defendants with lesser crimes to avoid triggering mandatory minimums while they do not do the same for minority defendants. Hypothetically then mandatory minimums would be fair (this is not an argument that they are), but individual courtroom actors abuse their discretion to make it unfair.

As it relates to the study of sentencing disparities, Type B disparities warrant a systems-based approach. What was the goal of the law/policy the legislature passed? If implemented 100% faithfully, what effect would the policies have on disparities? Qualitative research should be done to understand the legislative process involved in the crafting of the law and the law’s desired effect. Quantitative research could be done to understand the effects of the law if implemented 100% faithfully. Real criminal case proceedings could be supplied and then sentences could be prescribed algorithmically according to whatever the policy would have one do. A hypothetical prison population would then be generated along with hypothetical populations of minority and white offenders which could then be used to assess disparity.

Type A discretion and associated disparity could be studied by assessing how different the real prison population disparities are from the hypothetical/simulated prison population generated by following the policy 100% faithfully. A discrepancy between the two versions would suggest Type A discretion is either reducing disparity or increasing disparity. Other methods could be involved too which would involve modeling individual-actors’ decision processes to gain a better understanding of what is influencing them. Similarly qualitative procedures could be employed as well to gain a better understanding of how individual actors come to their decisions.

3) Engen identifies “things we know, do not know, and need to know” about [[Mass incarceration]]. Describe two ways that sentencing research could help us learn what we “need to know.” In addition, describe one other “thing we do not know and need to know” about mass incarceration and sentencing.

**Need To Know**

- Paraphrasing from Engen, “How have major sentencing reforms of the last 40 years affected punishment in the USA?” Put another way, which of our policy choices have contributed the most/least to mass incarceration? How much of a role has sentencing policy contributed to mass incarceration? Sentencing research could begin doing more macro-level research to gain more of a sense into how policy differentiation across different jurisdictions has contributed to higher/lower prison populations and more/less disparity. By macro-level research, I mean comparing across cities/counties/states rather than just at the individual level. Longitudinal comparisons over time (comparing places before/after implementation of a policy as well as comparing places which have/haven’t implemented a policy) would also be useful.
    
- Paraphrasing from Engen, “What is the relationship between individual-level case outcomes and imprisonment rates at the macro-level particularly as it pertains to disparities and disproportionality?” I.e. how do individual-level decisions snowball and acquire a systematic character leading to broad disparities within a system. Sentencing research should continue its work into understanding how individual-level criminal justice actors make decisions (using both quantitative and qualitative methods). However these individual level factors could then be applied to scale for various counties and states. For example, assuming race has a certain effect or coefficient in a specific region, do those results simply scale if applied to every individual case? Or are there some group/network effects or macro-level variables which are mediating these individual-level decisions?

**Thing We Don’t Know (But Need To Know)**

- Sentencing researchers should not only be focused on understanding what effects past policies had, but they should also be focused on understanding what works best to reduce prison populations and reduce disparities. We don’t know what works, but it is something vitally important we need to know.