---
type: Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #dnd #ray_campaign_summer_2023 

## Characters

* Kazamir -> Spring elf wizard (student).
* Fabian -> Drow fighter (sell sword).
* Jerg -> Wood elf bard.
* Lombard -> Mountain dwarf barbarian.

## Late at night/early morning

We all roll into the town of [[Ufer]] very late:
* Kazamir was playing cards very late (Magic the Gathering).
* Fabian's horse gave out, and he had to walk.
	* Important item -> The Creation of the Sacred Flame and Applications (Book 1 of a three-part series). It's a drow book. The creation of the Sacred Flame led to the creation of the Drow empire and those Drow who did not follow were sent to [[Akhris]].
* Jerg did not want to take a boat because he does not trust them.
* Lombard was playing dice in [[Port Calle]] and had to skip town after accusing the host of cheating.
* Gregor rides into town during battle, a *knight in ivory armor* if you will.

After just getting to sleep, we are awoken by a large boom. Kazamir and Favian go up to explore and find the [[Dew Drop Inn]] has disappeared as well as the town of [[Ufer]]. There are no people left, and there are no standing structures left. There are some animals running around amidst the burning rubble. It does not *appear* as if this was a dragon attack (no evidence of dragons in the sky nor does the flame smell like dragon flame).

As Kazamir scans the horizon, he sees a man in purple robes with scrolls in hand who departs as they make eye contact.

We barely survive an encounter with a group of flame elementals. A group of knights come soon after, and they know Gregor. The leader of the group, [[Sir Raldaron]], has told us he is in charge of protecting the area from a rogue wizard. He entreats us to come to [[Aerith Academy]] where we can meet the [[Prime Magus]] who can better explain what happened.