---
type:
  - Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #dnd #ray_campaign_summer_2023 

The group of watchmen escorting us are dressed in ivory armor.

We soon find ourselves in [[Aerith Academy]] which has dozens buildings as part of its establishment. They are all pale brick and similarly laid out and structured with all buildings being 2-3 stories tall. Some are labeled academic buildings, some are artisan buildings, and some are not labeled.

All the buildings are the same except for one in the middle, a grand spire. Presumably, it is the location of the [[Prime Magus]].

We follow [[Gregor]] to the grand spire and follow him a spiral staircase. After climbing an uncountable number of stairs, we meet the Prime Magus. He is dressed in purple robes and has seasoned but also mysterious presence. It is hard to pin down his background exactly.

Gregor confers with the Prime Magus and confirms that our party were the only survivors.

[[Fabian]] presents the Prime Magus with his book ([[The Creation of the Sacred Flame and Applications]]), and the Prime Magus is astounded Fabian has this book. There are 9 books in the series (3 sets of 3). Sarkus seems to have read all the books in the series except for the one Fabian has (a family heirloom). Sarkus believed these tomes were the only written history of [[Grasmere]] from more than 200 years ago, and Sarkus believed these tomes were important for the modern day. The Prime Magus thinks they should have been destroyed, though.

Fabian reveals he is a drow, and the Prime Magus is intrigued. He wants to know more about how Fabian has a copy of this book. Fabian insists it simply was kept in his family and not treated as a special text. Series one (of the books) charted the rise and fall of the drow empire. Series two charted *mechanisms in lieu of flesh* also known as the books of artifice. The demon of artifice which drove the drow empire apart. Series three is about arcane arts unknown to other races. Sarkus believed Fabian's book was the key book in the series.

The Prime Magus proceeds to inform us about Sarkus. [[Sarkus]] was an important professor and historian at the Academy but became a rogue mage. It seems to have shook the academy to its core as they lost a stalwart of their community. Furthermore, he is incredibly dangerous as his aims are unknown, and he seems to have the power to decimate whole villages. It is believed he was responsible for destroying [[Ufer]] and the [[Dew Drop Inn]]. Presumably, Sarkus is the man we saw disappear into the woods right before our battle with the flame elementals.

Aerith Academy is under lock down, and the [[Ivory Guard]] are on constant watch protecting the borders of the Academy and trying to locate Sarkus.

We all agree to help the Prime Magus in his quest to capture Sarkus. [[Lombard]] visits the brewing hall and meets some Stone Knuckle and Iron Back mountain dwarfs where much happy cavorting and merriment is made. Everyone else gets ready for the journey. [[Kazamir]], [[Jerg]], and Lombard are in the cart being dragged along by Fabian while Gregor rides alongside him also on horseback.

As we approach the smoldering ruin of Ufer, a few shadowy figures emerge on the path into the town.