---
type:
  - Meeting
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #policing #linda_project 

## Immediate to-dos

* See how easily linked the the Ba et al. 2021 shift data is to the Invisible Institute data.
  
* Break down the distribution of beat assignment types into: **1)** beat assignments which correspond to physical locations (including alphabetical suffixes), **2)** beat assignments which correspond to desk duty (end in 02), and **3)** beat assignments which do not have a physical location nor are they desk duty (unknowns). **Note**: We could try and infer a physical location for these unknown beat assignments by looking on a map where the recorded police activity is happening.
  
	* Determine what percentage of officer shift assignments are generated by each of these beat categories.
	  
* Create mosaic plots or balloon plots or something like them. Adjust the widths of the bars in the bar plot to be proportional to the size of the shift assignment?
## Data decisions and limitations

* I assume a unique shift assignment is composed of a unique unit, unique beat assignment, and time. One could argue unit should not be included. I err for *conservative* estimates or underestimates of how often police officers work with each other.
  
	* How often do officers work together (make stops/arrests) in the same beat-time but in different units?
  
* I also assume beat assignments are unique inclusive of the alphabetical suffixes they sometimes include. One could argue alphabetical suffixes should not be included. I, again, err for conservative estimates or underestimates of how often police officers work with each other.
  
	* How often do officers work together (make stops/arrests) across suffixes for the same beat-time?
  
* It is not an exact process of linking stops, arrests, and uses of force to a shift assignment. Ba et al. 2021 (as well as myself) basically use the logic that the time of a stop/arrest/use of force must occur between the start time and end time of any given shift for an officer. Any stops/arrests/uses of force which do not occur during a recorded shift for an officer is de facto an off-duty action. There are, of course, some issues with this:
  
	* Stops/arrests/uses of force could occur some time before or after an officer's official shift ended.
	  
	* An officer's shift may not have ever been recorded in the data. I am not sure how common or likely this. If it was common, I would have assumed Ba et al. 2021 would have mentioned this.
	  
	* An officer's shift may not have a start time or end time so we cannot link any activities to that shift. **Note**: I need to back and check if shifts which are missing the start and end times are also missing the dates. We can try and impute the officer's missing shift times based on the most common start and end times for other officers who worked that shift.
## Regularity in Shift Assignments

### Findings

* We found that the median officer works their most common shift around 50% of the time, the median officer only ever works 13 unique shift assignments, most police officers only ever work for one unit in this time period, and a police officer, on average, works about 4 shifts a week. This suggests a degree of regularity in a police officer's work. **This increases our trust in the data!**
### Research questions

* If we are able to link the data to the roster data from the Invisible Institute, we could get a better sense of the reasons why an officer is not working: **1)** Not hired yet, **2)** Retired, **3)** Promoted, or **4)** Some other reason (e.g., punishment, reward, vacation, etc.).
  
* Can we determine *why* officers work an irregular shift? Is it a punishment?
	  
* How does officer behavior change when working irregular shifts?
	  
* How does it change who they interact with?
	  
* A more practical question is how do we *summarize* (in a single number or some other way) the regularity with which an officer works shift assignments. And then how do we determine what is a *irregular* shift as a related but distinct question?
	  
	* You can think of an officer as the distribution of their shift assignments and how often they work each shift assignment they have ever been assigned to. An officer who only ever works one shift assignment would have the highest amount of regularity while an officer who worked 10 shift assignments equally would have a high amount of irregularity (as compared to the officer who only ever worked one shift). In between these extremes, you will have different degrees of regularity, though. How do we categorize them?
		  
	* Once we have determined the regularity of shift assignments for officers, we need to determine for each officer what counts as a irregular shift. There are a dizzying number of ways we could do this (the *X* least worked shift assignments for each officer, the bottom *X*-tile of shift assignments, absolute number cutoffs, some combination of these measures). The tricky part is that a universal cutoff will mean different things for different officers. An officer with high regularity in shift assignments might need a different definition of what an irregular shift is compared to an officer with relatively lower regularity.
## Stops and Arrests

### Findings

* An important point to note is that there is not an overarching *event ID* we can take advantage of to link stops to arrests to uses of force. We can  only infer linkages based on the time and location of these events.
  
* When we consider stops and arrests which involve no off-duty officers, most stops and arrests (~80% and ~70% respectively) occur between officers working the same shift. **This is very high and increases our trust in the data!**
  
* The amount of stops and arrests which involve off-duty officers is pretty high though, shockingly. Why is this? How do we deal with this? This issue is discussed a bit above under [data decisions and limitations](#Data decisions and limitations).
### Research questions

* Where are officers making stops/arrests in relation to where they are assigned to patrol? Stops and arrests have a latitude and longitude so it would be a bit more involved to figure out where they are happening in relation to where an officer is assigned to patrol.
  
* Most shift assignments (~60%) are have only one officer assigned to them whereas most stops and arrests involve two officers. **Question**: It would be interesting to investigate if these officers working alone are involved with stops and arrests with other officers and how far away the assigned patrols are of the officers. The important point here is that I am suspicious of how solitary the shifts are for those police officers who are assigned no partner.
## Racial, sex, and experiential variation in shift assignments

### Findings

* Most shift assignments are hardly worked. Roughly 17% of all unique shift assignments generated 80% of the actual oﬀicer shift assignments. 23% of all unique shift assignments generated 90% of the actual oﬀicer shift assignments.
  
* In every unit/district, there are some number of shift assignments which police officers work. Across all 4 years of data availability, we can calculate the percentage of officers who ever worked a shift assignment who are Black, White, Hispanic, male, etc. Through this exercise, we can see there are shift assignments in which only one racial group (or only one sex group) ever works those shift assignments. So despite potential surface-level heterogeneity, if officers are not working the same shift assignments, then can we really say the unit/district is diverse?
  
	* **Note**: We can make this analysis unique on officer i.e., every officer who ever worked this particular shift **or** we do not make this analysis unique on officer. So let's say there were 4,000 officer shift assignments across all 4 years for this particular shift. The unit of analysis here would be the officer shift assignment and associated demographics. The above analysis would make the officer the unit of analysis. Could lead to different results (e.g., if one Black officer repeatedly works a shift, the shift could look very **Black** even though it is only one Black officer working the shift).
  
* We can drill down even further into shift assignments and see if officers from different racial backgrounds are more or less likely to be working the same shift assignment but at different times or at the same times.
### Research questions

* Which segregation indices (or other measure) would be most potentially useful in summarizing the amount that officers from different racial groups (sex groups, experience levels) work together or work separately?
  
	* We can do this for **1)** shift assignments within a unit, **2)** shift timings within shift assignments, and **3)** shift timings across all shift assignments within a unit.
	  
		* Which **units** are most (e.g., racially) segregated by shift assignment?
		  
		* Which **shift assignments** are most segregated based on officers from different (e.g., racial/ethnic) groups working at different times?
		  
		* Taking into account potential (e.g, racial) differences in shift timings, which units are most racially segregated?
		  
* Is there something unique or interesting about those shift assignments and shift assignment timings which are predominantly a minority group?
  
* Segregation within units vs. segregation across units.