---
type:
  - Note
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`
* **Tags**: #pathfinder #justin_campaign_winter2024 

We come across some High Elf Legionnaires engaged in battle with the frog people. We are able to assist the frog people and kill all the elves. Ray takes their leader's ornate curved blade. We manage some small talk with the Frog people before we head out on our way. I reveal my Sprig Head to my companions. [[Voss Whisperwind]] does not trust me.

As we continue North to meet the High Elf army, we continually come across large piles of High elf corpses seemingly killed by High elf magic as they have had their life essence sucked out of them in a manner akin to a vampire (although we learn it is most definitely not a vampire). We are not sure what could be causing High Elves to turn on one another. Nevertheless, we march on.

We are shocked to learn that the Army seemingly does not stop as the tracks do not stop and do not indicate any rest was had. As we ourselves are tired, we rest for the night. During the night, myself and [[Mortizal]]'s skeleton are awakened by the presence of two dogs in the distance. I beckon them over to us, and they are friendly and seemingly well-trained. One of them carries a ring around its neck which Mortizal promptly places on his finger causing the sound of sleigh bells to emanate from him every time he moves. We hear rustling not too far from our camp. We investigate to find two goblins hiding from us. They seem more afraid than dangerous. Nevertheless, we kill one and take the other hostage.

In the morning, we continue our trek North towards the army, with our new companions in tow (the dogs and the goblin), and come across more piles of corpses of the [[the High Sylvan Legions]]. We also come across a Kobold trading caravan where Mortizal purchases a jumping potion. We also learn from our goblin *friend* that they and their companion escaped from a High elf slaver caravan that was taking them to compete in the gladiatorial slave pits.

As we near the High Elf army, we come across an abandoned High Elf turnpike which has been seemingly decimated by a giant spider. We found some leftover gold the kobolds used to bribe the High Elves and continue on our way.