---
type:
  - Book
author:
  - Michelle Alexander
year: 2012
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`

## Metadata

* **Author(s)**: Michelle Alexander
* **Title**: The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness
* **Date of publication**: 2012-01-16
* **Tags**: #comps_exam, #cj_system, #soc_597_drugs, #mass_incarceration , #racial_inequality
* **PDF Attachments**:
  * [alexanderNewJimCrow2012.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26)

## Highlighted Notes

### Introduction

The criminal justice system has replaced the Jim Crow system. We still have a racial caste system. Its entire purpose is to enforce racial hierarchy.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=2&annotation=VU2CAPEL) “What has changed since the collapse of Jim Crow has less to do with the basic structure of our society than with the language we use to justify it. In the era of colorblindness, it is no longer socially permissible to use race, explicitly, as a justification for discrimination, exclusion, and social contempt. So we don’t. Rather than rely on race, we use our criminal justice system to label people of color “criminals” and then engage in all the practices we supposedly left behind. Today it is perfectly legal to discriminate against criminals in nearly all the ways that it was once legal to discriminate against African Americans. Once you’re labeled a felon, the old forms of discrimination: employment discrimination, housing discrimination, denial of the right to vote, denial of educational opportunity, denial of food stamps and other public benefits, and exclusion from jury service—are suddenly legal. As a criminal, you have scarcely more rights, and arguably less respect, than a black man living in Alabama at the height of Jim Crow. We have not ended racial caste in America; we have merely redesigned it.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 2](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=4&annotation=RBG2CMXA) “It was not just another institution infected with racial bias but rather a different beast entirely. The activists who posted the sign on the telephone pole were not crazy; nor were the smattering of lawyers and advocates around the country who were beginning to connect the dots between our current system of mass incarceration and earlier forms of social control. Quite belatedly, I came to see that mass incarceration in the United States had, in fact, emerged as a stunningly comprehensive and well-disguised system of racialized social control that functions in a manner strikingly similar to Jim Crow.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 4](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

The War on Drugs was spawned to reinforce racial hierarchy. It was not launched *in response* to the crack-cocaine crisis. There was a kernel of truth in the conspiracy theories that the War on Drugs was a plan by the USA government to wipe out Black people.
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=5&annotation=Y4TMCTDF) “The timing of the crack crisis helped to fuel conspiracy theories and general speculation in poor black communities that the War on Drugs was part of a genocidal plan by the government to destroy black people in the United States.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 5](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=6&annotation=UXIN78FA) “The CIA admitted in 1998 that guerilla armies it actively supported in Nicaragua were smuggling illegal drugs into the United States—drugs that were making their way onto the streets of inner-city black neighborhoods in the form of crack cocaine. The CIA also admitted that, in the midst of the War on Drugs, it blocked law enforcement efforts to investigate illegal drug networks that were helping to fund its covert war in Nicaragua.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 6](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=6&annotation=7KVQ4RYM) “In fact, the War on Drugs began at a time when illegal drug use was on the decline. During this same time period, however, a war was declared, causing arrests and convictions for drug offenses to skyrocket, especially among people of color.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 6](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Disparities in punishment

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=6&annotation=MGPINX8U) “The United States imprisons a larger percentage of its black population than South Africa did at the height of apartheid.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 6](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=7&annotation=TVRVQUQF) “These stark racial disparities cannot be explained by rates of drug crime. Studies show that people of all colors use and sell illegal drugs at remarkably similar rates.10” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 7](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) Victimization surveys? #question We know individuals from different racial/ethnic groups are differentially involved in crime offending and victimization.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=7&annotation=XC4X5DTR) “If there are significant differences in the surveys to be found, they frequently suggest that whites, particularly white youth, are more likely to engage in drug crime than people of color.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 7](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=7&annotation=R67PI838) “... governments use punishment primarily as a tool of social control, and thus the extent or severity of punishment is often unrelated to actual crime patterns.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 7](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> [[pickettPublicOpinionCriminal2019]] would likely disagree.

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=8&annotation=LPU3VSML) “... National Advisory Commission on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals, which issued a recommendation in 1973 that 'no new institutions for adults should be built and existing institutions for juveniles should be closed.''” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 8](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=14&annotation=2ABLLH7I) “The current system of control depends on black exceptionalism; it is not disproved or undermined by it.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 14](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=14&annotation=BT24686L) “... racial caste systems do not require racial hostility or overt bigotry to thrive. They need only racial indifference, as Martin Luther King Jr. warned more than forty-five years ago.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 14](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

The slow decarceration we are seeing is borne out of economic necessity and not a desire to ensure racial equity (thus the policies pursued will reflect that). Putting a stake in here. We need to start reducing the number of people being labeled criminal. Not the lengths of the sentences.
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=14&annotation=6WZ5CIPB) “... but out of concern for bursting state budgets in a time of economic recession. In other words, the racial ideology that gave rise to these laws remains largely undisturbed. Changing economic conditions or rising crime rates could easily result in a reversal of fortunes for those who commit drug crimes, particularly if the drug criminals are perceived to be black and brown. Equally important to understand is this: Merely reducing sentence length, by itself, does not disturb the basic architecture of the New Jim Crow. So long as large numbers of African Americans continue to be arrested and labeled drug criminals, they will continue to be relegated to a permanent second-class status upon their release, no matter how much (or how little) time they spend behind bars. The system of mass incarceration is based on the prison label, not prison time.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 14](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

A cultural movement is needed to dismantle the system.
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=15&annotation=67J7M4LA) “... the notion that the New Jim Crow can ever be dismantled through traditional litigation and policy-reform strategies that are wholly disconnected from a major social movement seems fundamentally misguided.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 15](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) 

### Chapter 2

The War on Drugs was not meant to improve public safety, and it was the catalyst for the new system of racial oppression.
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=59&annotation=T4N8HRGM) “The first is that the war is aimed at ridding the nation of drug “kingpins” or big-time dealers. Nothing could be further from the truth. The vast majority of those arrested are not charged with serious offenses. In 2005, for example, four out of five drug arrests were for possession, and only one out of five was for sales.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=59&annotation=DZI85WCC) “The second myth is that the drug war is principally concerned with dangerous drugs. Quite to the contrary, arrests for marijuana possession—a drug less harmful than tobacco or alcohol—accounted for nearly 80 percent of the growth in drug arrests in the 1990s.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Supreme Court

Author spends a long time going over how the Supreme Court greatly expanded the powers of the police during this time period.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=60&annotation=KZ4TILPG) “With only a few exceptions, the Supreme Court has seized every opportunity to facilitate the drug war, primarily by eviscerating Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable searches and seizures by the police.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 60](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=62&annotation=RFFGL36B) “... that grant law enforcement a pecuniary interest in the drug war and make it relatively easy for the police to seize people virtually anywhere... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 62](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))z

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=62&annotation=3LGK955U) “In Terry v. Ohio, decided in 1968, the Supreme Court modified that understanding, but only modestly, by ruling that if and when a police officer observes unusual conduct by someone the officer reasonably believes to be dangerous and engaged in criminal activity, the officer 'is entitled for the protection of himself and others in the area' to conduct a limited search 'to discover weapons that might be used against the officer.'' Known as the stop-and-frisk rule, the Terry decision stands for the proposition that, so long as a police officer has 'reasonable articulable suspicion' that someone is engaged in criminal activity and dangerous, it is constitutionally permissible to stop, question, and frisk him or her—even in the absence of probable cause.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 62](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=62&annotation=72BF77WN) “Justice Douglas dissented in Terry on the grounds that 'granting police greater power than a judge is to take a long step down the totalitarian path.' He objected to the notion that police should be free to conduct warrantless searches whenever they suspect someone is a criminal, believing that dispensing with the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement risked opening the door to the same abuses that gave rise to the American Revolution.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 62](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=63&annotation=GGJ6S2E9) “Florida v. Bostick.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 63](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> Suspicion-less police sweeps of buses. Dragnet operations and interviews of passengers.
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=64&annotation=NTLH5ZR2) “The U.S. Supreme Court reversed. The Court ruled that Bostick’s encounter with the police was purely voluntary, and therefore he was not “seized” within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 64](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> Related to the above. The encounter was voluntary. He was not seized against his will which is what the 4th Amendment prohibits.
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=65&annotation=D76LJRLH) “As federal judge Prentiss Marshall explained, 'The average person encountered will feel obliged to stop and respond. Few will feel that they can walk away or refuse to answer.'” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 65](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> Precisely. Most people will be afraid to refuse.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=65&annotation=UA4JSHAQ) “In Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, decided in 1973, the Court admitted that if waiver of one’s right to refuse consent were truly 'knowing, intelligent, and voluntary,'' it would 'in practice create serious doubt whether consent searches would continue to be conducted.' In other words, consent searches are valuable tools for the police only because hardly anyone dares to say no.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 65](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> https://www.oyez.org/cases/1972/71-732
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=65&annotation=FS7SKEEM) “So long as orders are phrased as a question, compliance is interpreted as consent. 'May I speak to you?'' thunders an officer. 'Will you put your arms up and stand... ' ([Alexander, 2012, p. 65](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> No one is going to refuse. So it is always interpreted as consent.

#### Traffic Stops

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=66&annotation=RRPZG8EU) “A classic pretext stop is a traffic stop motivated not by any desire to enforce traffic laws, but instead motivated by a desire to hunt for drugs in the absence of any evidence of illegal drug activity. In other words, police officers use minor traffic violations as an excuse—a pretext to search for drugs, even though there is not a shred of evidence suggesting the motorist is violating drug laws. Pretext stops, like consent searches, have received the Supreme Court’s unequivocal blessing.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 66](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=67&annotation=S8HCZK7D) “Ohio v. Robinette... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 67](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> No one needs to be informed of their rights during a stop or search and police can use minor traffic stops as a pretext to searching for drugs (even if there is no evidence for drugs).
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=68&annotation=7T5SNSM3) “But there’s more. Even if motorists, after being detained and interrogated, have the nerve to refuse consent to a search, the police can arrest them anyway. In Atwater v. City of Lago Vista, the Supreme Court held that the police may arrest motorists for minor traffic violations and throw them in jail (even if the statutory penalty for the traffic violation is a mere fine, not jail time).” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 68](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=68&annotation=RHKJ684H) “Another legal option for officers frustrated by a motorist’s refusal to grant 'consent' is to bring a drug-sniffing dog to the scene. This option is available to police in traffic stops, as well as to law enforcement officials confronted with resistant travelers in airports and in bus or train stations who refuse to give the police consent to search their luggage. The Supreme Court has ruled that walking a drug-sniffing dog around someone’s vehicle (or someone’s luggage) does not constitute a 'search,'' and therefore does not trigger Fourth Amendment scrutiny. If the dog alerts to drugs, then the officer has probable cause to search without the person’s consent.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 68](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=70&annotation=QBWQR93P)“'Operation Pipeline is exactly what the Framers meant to prohibit: a federally-run general search program that targets people without cause for suspicion, particularly those who belong to disfavored groups.'” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 70](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=70&annotation=EHQ4KTGA) “The program’s success requires police to stop 'staggering' numbers of people in shotgun fashion. This 'volume' approach to drug enforcement sweeps up extraordinary numbers of innocent people. As one California Highway Patrol Officer said, 'It’s sheer numbers. . . . You’ve got to kiss a lot of frogs before you find a prince.'” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 70](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Asset forfeiture and the militarization of the police

Police were resistant as were some conservatives who believed in state rights. However, money eventually brings everyone around -> grants and prestige.

Militarization of the police.

Asset forfeiture -> You have to show the property was not involved in the commission of a crime even when you have not been. -> often not entitled to legal counsel and property could be seized based on probable cause alone -> [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=81&annotation=2BFH22RJ) “... that the owner of the property is not entitled to the appointment of counsel in the forfeiture proceeding, unless he or she has been charged with a crime.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 81](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

Under this environment -> wide purview to be searched and have your property taken, may not have legal counsel, pressured to accept plea deals, pretrial incarceration -> de facto authoritarian state.

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=71&annotation=4M94UEW4) “The fact that police are legally allowed to engage in a wholesale roundup of nonviolent drug offenders does not answer the question why they would choose to do so, particularly when most police departments have far more serious crimes to prevent and solve. Why would police prioritize drug-law enforcement? Drug use and abuse is nothing new; in fact, it was on the decline, not on the rise, when the War on Drugs began. So why make drug-law enforcement a priority now? Once again, the answer lies in the system’s design. Every system of control depends for its survival on the tangible and intangible benefits that are provided to those who are responsible for the system’s maintenance and administration. This system is no exception.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 71](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=72&annotation=I88F3IEC) “Many state and local law enforcement officials were less than pleased with the attempt by the federal government to assert itself in local crime fighting, viewing the new drug war as an unwelcome distraction. Participation in the drug war required a diversion of resources away from more serious crimes, such as murder, rape, grand theft, and violent assault—all of which were of far greater concern to most communities than illegal drug use.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 72](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=72&annotation=9ANKK6TH) “... necessary to build a consensus among state and local law enforcement agencies that the drug war should be a top priority in their hometowns. The solution: cash. Huge cash grants were made to those law enforcement agencies that were willing to make drug-law enforcement a top priority.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 72](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=72&annotation=P4Y5YRUD) “The DEA has offered free training, intelligence, and technical support to state highway patrol agencies that are willing to commit their officers to highway drug interdiction. The Pentagon, for its part, has given away military intelligence and millions of dollars in firepower to state and local agencies willing to make the rhetorical war a literal one.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 72](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=75&annotation=Z25JJDJD)“President Reagan persuaded Congress to pass the Military Cooperation with Law Enforcement Act... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 75](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=76&annotation=C7CHTSJF) “The incentives program worked. Drug arrests skyrocketed, as SWAT teams swept through urban housing projects, highway patrol agencies organized drug interdiction units on the freeways, and stop-and-frisk programs were set loose on the streets.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 76](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=77&annotation=HSRRP429) “As if the free military equipment, training, and cash grants were not enough, the Reagan administration provided law enforcement with yet another financial incentive to devote extraordinary resources to drug law enforcement, rather than more serious crimes: state and local law enforcement agencies were granted the authority to keep, for their own use, the vast majority of cash and assets they seize when waging the drug war.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 77](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=77&annotation=PYEVHIIN) “... the provision was justified as an effort 'to forestall the spread of drugs in a way criminal penalties could not—by striking at its economic roots.' When a drug dealer is sent to jail, there are many others ready and willing to take his place, but seizing the means of production, some legislators reasoned, may shut down the trafficking business for good.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 77](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=78&annotation=4G3U2Q4A) “At the time the new rules were adopted, the law governing civil forfeiture was so heavily weighted in favor of the government that fully 80 percent of forfeitures went uncontested.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 78](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=79&annotation=U8Q2QFSI) “... has created an environment in which a very fine line exists between the lawful and the unlawful taking of other people’s money and property—a line so thin that some officers disregard the formalities of search warrants, probable cause, and reasonable suspicion altogether.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 79](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=80&annotation=7TFGHFCH)“In 2000, Congress passed the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act which was meant to address many of the egregious examples of abuse of civil forfeiture. Some of the most widely cited examples involved wealthy whites whose property was seized.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 80](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=80&annotation=RP2WTS7U)“The Reform Act resulted in a number of significant due-process changes, such as shifting the burden of proof onto the government, eliminating the requirement that an owner post a cost bond, and providing some minimal hardship protections for innocent parties who stand to lose their homes. These reforms, however, do not go nearly far enough.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 80](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=81&annotation=D39937ZK) “The act remedied this insanity to some extent; it provides an 'innocent owner' defense to those whose property has been seized. However, the defense is seriously undermined by the fact that the government’s burden of proof is so low—the government need only establish by a 'preponderance of the evidence' that the property was involved in the commission of a drug crime. This standard of proof is significantly lower” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 81](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=81&annotation=8LNDTLH2) “This means, for example, that a woman who knew that her husband occasionally smoked pot could have her car forfeited to the government because she allowed him to use her car. Because the 'car' was guilty of transporting someone who had broken a drug law at some time, she could legally lose her only form of transportation, even though she herself committed no crime.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 81](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Public defenders and prosecutors

Public defenders are woefully underfunded and have enormous case loads. You can also sometimes lose the right to your defense if you have outstanding legal fees.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=84&annotation=566RMN97) “... funding public defender offices and paying private attorneys to represent those accused of crimes has been a low priority.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 84](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

Meanwhile prosecutors have enormous power. They decide the charges and often overcharge to force defendants to plead guilty.

* Alexander goes on to describe how sentencing guidelines have been bad and have created more power for prosecutors. She also describes how the court system has become like a menu system which lawyers haggle over. #question I do not think it was true that sentencing guidelines were created to purposefully give more power to prosecutors. Additionally, I do not think sentencing guidelines happened in conjunction with or with any logical relation to the War on Drugs.
  
* Additionally, it has been the case for quite some time that the justice system has been about lawyers haggling and not going to trial.

The implication being that this system leads to a lot of innocent people being found guilty. This is a tough to answer empirically, though. It is also hard to know how high is too high.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=87&annotation=IIREPENZ) “It is impossible to know for certain how many innocent drug defendants convict themselves every year by accepting a plea bargain out of fear of mandatory sentences, or how many are convicted due to lying informants and paid witnesses, but reliable estimates of the number of innocent people currently in prison tend to range from 2 percent to 5 percent.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 87](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

The end result of this system is more people getting labeled a criminal. Alexander says reducing prison length time is not enough because the label is what is the main problem. Additionally, she is also arguing this system is not making us safer since most arrests (and especially rearrests) are for nonviolent crimes.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=92&annotation=8VWJWAHY) “Because harsh sentencing is the primary cause of the prison explosion, one might reasonably assume that substantially reducing the length of prison sentences would effectively dismantle this new system of control. That view, however, is mistaken. This system depends on the prison label, not prison time.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 92](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=93&annotation=XUYCB5KX) “The extraordinary increase in prison admissions due to parole and probation violations is due almost entirely to the War on Drugs. With respect to parole, in 1980, only 1 percent of all prison admissions were parole violators. Twenty years later, more than one third (35 percent) of prison admissions resulted from parole violations.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 93](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

### Chapter 3

#highlight One point Alexander makes especially clear is that legal variables considered during sentencing are incredibly racially biased -> see [[kurlychekCumulativeDisadvantageAmerican2019]] for a detailed discussion on this problem and the accumulation of disadvantage through contact with the criminal justice system.

Alexander argues, at least for drug offenses, it has to be racially constructed because rates of drug usage are the same across different racial groups. Even for other offenses, it is typically true that involvement in violent crime is higher among Black males. However, as Alexander points out, violent crime and incarceration are not correlated. So this is kind of a conflation of two arguments. You might imagine the racial disparity would still exist but the absolute numbers should ebb and flow (instead of just steadily increasing).

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=97&annotation=Q9FQPI8D) “There is, of course, an official explanation for all of this: crime rates. This explanation has tremendous appeal—before you know the facts—for it is consistent with, and reinforces, dominant racial narratives about crime and criminality dating back to slavery. The truth, however, is that rates and patterns of drug crime do not explain the glaring racial disparities in our criminal justice system. People of all races use and sell illegal drugs at remarkably similar rates. If there are significant differences in the surveys to be found, they frequently suggest that whites, particularly white youth, are more likely to engage in illegal drug dealing than people of color.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 97](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=99&annotation=HGBD64WT) “They point to violent crime rates in the African American community as a justification for the staggering number of black men who find themselves behind bars. Black men, they say, have much higher rates of violent crime; that’s why so many of them are locked in prisons. Typically, this is where the discussion ends. The problem with this abbreviated analysis is that violent crime is not responsible for the prison boom. As numerous researchers have shown, violent crime rates have fluctuated over the years and bear little relationship to incarceration rates—which have soared during the past three decades regardless of whether violent crime was going up or down. Today violent crime rates are at historically low levels, yet incarceration rates continue to climb.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 99](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=99&annotation=WCQA9JG5) “The uncomfortable reality is that convictions for drug offenses-not violent crime-are the single most important cause of the prison boom in the United States, and people of color are convicted of drug offenses at rates out of all proportion to their drug crimes.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 99](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) This is an interesting contrast with other commentators who point out violent offenders make up a large portion of the incarcerated population and represent a problem for decarceration. #question 

#### Racially blind discrimination

1. Grant extraordinary discretion to police officers.
2. Require that challenging the system requires formally proving that in your individual case there was racial bias in play at the hands of the decision makers.
3. Use dog whistles and media narratives to implicitly paint Black individuals as the enemy and source of the drug problem.

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=100&annotation=MD9WNL8D) “The first step is to grant law enforcement officials extraordinary discretion regarding whom to stop, search, arrest, and charge for drug offenses, thus ensuring that conscious and unconscious racial beliefs and stereotypes will be given free reign. Unbridled discretion inevitably creates huge racial disparities.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 100](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=100&annotation=77DXS4WJ) “Demand that anyone who wants to challenge racial bias in the system offer, in advance, clear proof that the racial disparities are the product of intention racial discrimination... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 100](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=102&annotation=D5WRTW7U) “... the Reagan administration to build support for its new war. Drug use, once considered a private, public-health matter, was reframed through political rhetoric and media imagery as a grave threat to the national order.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 102](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Supreme Court

As Alexander points out, it is impossible (and in fact probably does not exist) evidence that the racial disparities observed have come about because of overt, direct, and intentional racial hostility on the part of decision makers. The Supreme Court fails to acknowledge these realities.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=108&annotation=92NS7YQC) “The majority observed that significant racial disparities had been found in other criminal settings beyond the death penalty, and that McCleskey’s case implicitly calls into question the integrity of the entire system.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 108](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> My reading of this case is that the Supreme Court believes it cannot *undo* previous cases of discrimination. The best it can do is not prevent disparities from widening any further by ensuring the current decision processes have as many safeguards as possible.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=110&annotation=LEXLXQGL) “... finding that gross racial disparities do not merit strict scrutiny in the absence of evidence of explicit race discrimination-the very evidence unavailable in the era of colorblindness.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 110](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) Strict scrutiny only applies when race is explicitly invoked or intent can be proven. This follows from McCleskey. Disparity in outcomes or demonstrated through statistics is not, by itself, enough.

Historically, the Supreme Court did not always operate in this way. See the case of Yick Wo v. Hopkins -> [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=113&annotation=GGQLZUMS)

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=113&annotation=K8D7ISQY) “'Though the law itself be fair on its face, and impartial in appearance, yet, if it is applied and administered by public authority with an evil eye and an unequal hand, so as practically to make unjust and illegal discriminations... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 113](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

However, the Supreme Court nowadays holds unreasonably standards for proving racial bias.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=114&annotation=HW6C9VYU) “In May 1996, the Supreme Court reversed. As in McCleskey, the Court did not question the accuracy of the evidence submitted, but ruled that because Armstrong failed to identify any similarly situated white defendants who should have been charged in federal court but were not, he was not entitled even to discovery on his selective-prosecution claim. With no trace of irony, the Court demanded that Armstrong produce in advance the very thing he sought in discovery: information regarding white defendants who should have been charged in federal court.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 114](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=114&annotation=EVMI8UJS) “In order to state a claim of selective prosecution, they are required to offer in advance the very evidence that generally can be obtained only through discovery of the prosecutor’s files. The Court justified this insurmountable hurdle on the grounds that considerable deference is owed the exercise of prosecutorial discretion. Unless evidence of conscious, intentional bias on the part of the prosecutor... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 114](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

Lawyers are also granted enormous discretion in creating their juries.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=118&annotation=KKRD3LDL) “Peremptory strikes.”
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=119&annotation=H6AG4SBG) “The practice of systematically excluding black jurors has not been halted by Batson; the only thing that has changed is that prosecutors must come up with a race-neutral excuse for the strikes—an exceedingly easy task.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 119](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=119&annotation=PEALWXKL) “In Purkett v. Elm, in 1995, the Supreme Court ruled that any race-neutral reason, no matter how silly, ridiculous, or superstitious, is enough to satisfy the prosecutor’s burden...” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 119](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
* #highlight -> judges should be more active and not accept prosecutors throwing out jurors on the basis of their race.

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=121&annotation=4LAIYDKL) “Tactics that would be political suicide in an upscale white suburb are not even newsworthy in poor black and brown communities. So long as mass drug arrests are concentrated in impoverished urban areas, police chiefs have little reason to fear a political backlash, no matter how aggressive and warlike the efforts may be. And so long as the number of drug arrests increases or at least remains high, federal dollars continue to flow in and fill the department’s coffers.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 121](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> arguments in favor of police abolitionism. #highlight 

#### Legal protections for criminal justice system actors.

Many people do not have standing to sue the police department for racial bias.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=127&annotation=82PW9KC3) “The Court’s ruling in Lyons makes it extremely difficult to challenge systemic race discrimination in law enforcement and obtain meaningful policy reform. For example, African Americans in Seattle who hope to end the Seattle police department’s discriminatory tactics through litigation would be required to prove that they plan to violate drug laws and that they will almost certainly face race discrimination by Seattle police officers engaged in drug-law enforcement, in order to have standing to seek reform—i.e., just to get in the courthouse door.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 127](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

Also cannot typically sue the police.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=127&annotation=6439VFRJ) “Neither the state nor the state police can be sued for damages. In a series of cases, the Supreme Court has ruled that the state and its offices are immune from federal suits for damages under the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution (unless they consent), and the state can’t be sued for damages for constitutional violations in state court either. City police departments, like the LAPD, are also typically off limits. The Court has ruled that a city police department cannot be sued for damages unless a specific city policy or custom can be identified authorizing the illegal practice.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 127](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

Police are also allowed to racially profile.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=128&annotation=99KHY39C) “In United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, the Court concluded it was permissible under the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment for the police to use race as a factor in making decisions about which motorists to stop and search. In that case, the Court concluded that the police could take a person’s Mexican appearance into account when developing reasonable suspicion that a vehicle may contain undocumented immigrants.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 128](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=129&annotation=YLT5GGYL) “Because the Supreme Court has authorized the police to use race as a factor when making decisions regarding whom to stop and search, police departments believe that racial profiling exists only when race is the sole factor.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 129](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=129&annotation=9SFHZEL4) “Equally important, though, the sole-factor test ignores the ways in which seemingly race-neutral factors... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 129](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=130&annotation=J34MKTJ5) “Judges are just as reluctant to second-guess an officer’s motives as they are to second-guess prosecutors’. So long as officers refrain from uttering racial epithets and so long as they show the good sense not to say 'the only reason I stopped him was because he’s black', courts generally turn a blind eye to patterns of discrimination by the police.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 130](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

### Chapter 5

#### Colorblindness is essential to the operation of the system

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=174&annotation=UAI4Y7J6) “The sense that black men have disappeared is rooted in reality. The U.S. Census Bureau reported in 2002 that there are nearly 3 million more black adult women than men in black communities across the United States, a gender gap of 26 percent.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 174](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=175&annotation=CY99M3BG) “The fact that Barack Obama can give a speech on Father’s Day dedicated to the subject of fathers who are 'AWOL' without ever acknowledging that the majority of young black men in large urban areas are currently under the control of the criminal justice system is disturbing, to say the least.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 175](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=178&annotation=9CYKBMSZ) “That response is predictable because most people assume that racism, and racial systems generally, are fundamentally a function of attitudes. Because mass incarceration is officially colorblind, it seems inconceivable that the system could function much like a racial caste system. The widespread and mistaken belief that racial animus is necessary for the creation and maintenance of racialized systems of social control is the most important reason that we, as a nation, have remained in deep denial.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 178](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=178&annotation=6BFS7YLT)“These images make it easy to forget that many wonderful, goodhearted white people who were generous to others, respectful of their neighbors, and even kind to their black maids, gardeners, or shoe shiners—and wished them well—nevertheless went to the polls and voted for racial segregation.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 178](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Punishment for being a criminal

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=181&annotation=U5YWZDVR) “The final stage has been dubbed by some advocates as the period of invisible punishment. This term, first coined by Jeremy Travis, is meant to describe the unique set of criminal sanctions that are imposed on individuals after they step outside the prison gates, a form of punishment that operates largely outside of public view and takes effect outside the traditional sentencing framework.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 181](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=192&annotation=GEJU69KJ) “Arguably the most important parallel between mass incarceration and Jim Crow is that both have served to define the meaning and significance of race in America. Indeed, a primary function of any racial caste system is to define the meaning of race in its time. Slavery defined what it meant to be black (a slave), and Jim Crow defined what it meant to be black (a second-class citizen). Today mass incarceration defines the meaning of blackness in America: black people, especially black men, are criminals. That is what it means to be black. The temptation is to insist that black men 'choose' to be criminals; the system does not make them criminals, at least not in the way that slavery made blacks slaves or Jim Crow made them second-class citizens. The myth of choice here is seductive, but it should be resisted. African Americans are not significantly more likely to use or sell prohibited drugs than whites, but they are made criminals at drastically higher rates for precisely the same conduct. In fact, studies suggest that white professionals may be the most likely of any group to have engaged in illegal drug activity in their lifetime, yet they are the least likely to be made criminals.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 192](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=194&annotation=SCGBJ3AG) “'It’s respectable to tar and feather criminals, to advocate locking them up and throwing away the key. It’s not racist to be against crime, even though the archetypal criminal in the media and the public imagination almost always wears Willie Horton’s face.'” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 194](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#### Black people support get tough policies, though

[Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=196&annotation=G5H3AANJ) “The decision to wage the drug war primarily in black and brown communities rather than white ones and to target African Americans but not whites on freeways and train stations has had precisely the same effect as the literacy and poll taxes of an earlier era. A facially race-neutral system of laws has operated to create a racial caste system.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 196](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

The current system, rather than creating solidarity among Black people, creates shame.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=196&annotation=IGJXYCSE) “An example relates to the role of racial stigma in our society. As discussed in chapter 4, during Jim Crow, racial stigma contributed to racial solidarity in the black community. Racial stigma today, however—that is, the stigma of black criminality—has turned the black community against itself, destroyed networks of mutual support, and created a silence about the new caste system among many of the people most affected by it. The implications of this difference are profound. Racial stigma today makes collective action extremely difficult sometimes impossible; whereas racial stigma during Jim Crow contained the seeds of revolt.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 196](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

You do not need active hostility to do harm and sometimes it can actually be harmful.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=198&annotation=ZJXDXC7C)“This system of control depends far more on racial indifference (defined as a lack of compassion and caring about race and racial groups) than racial hostility—a feature it actually shares with its predecessors. All racial caste systems, not just mass incarceration, have been supported by racial indifference. As noted earlier, many whites during the Jim Crow era sincerely believed that African Americans were intellectually and morally inferior. They meant blacks no harm but believed segregation was a sensible system for managing a society comprised of fundamentally different and unequal people. The sincerity of many people’s racial beliefs is what led Martin Luther King Jr. to declare, 'Nothing in all the world is more dangerous than sincere ignorance and conscientious stupidity.' The notion that racial caste systems are necessarily predicated on a desire to harm other racial groups, and that racial hostility is the essence of racism, is fundamentally misguided. Even slavery does not conform to this limited understanding of racism and racial caste. Most plantation owners supported the institution of black slavery not because of a sadistic desire to harm blacks but instead because they wanted to get rich, and black slavery was the most efficient means to that end. By and large, plantation owners were indifferent to the suffering caused by slavery; they were motivated by greed.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 198](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

#disagree -> This is probably the point where I disagree the most with Alexander. I do not think White people are collateral in this system or are meant to somehow give validity to the idea that system cannot be racist because White people are getting arrested too. I think she missed a point to demonstrate how these racialized systems serve to harm all persons of lower classes and naturalize the system for those who have power.

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=198&annotation=SUVTM6DQ) “White victims of racial caste.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 198](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) One big difference. The White people who are harmed by this.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=199&annotation=UI9AGYUB) “In short, the inclusion of some whites in the system of control is essential to preserving the image of a colorblind criminal justice system and maintaining our self-image as fair and unbiased people. Because most Americans, including those within law enforcement, want to believe they are nonracist, the suffering in the drug war crosses the color line.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 199](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=200&annotation=JWYVYDDP)“The criminalization of white men would disturb us to the core.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 200](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> I think this does and has happened in many places.

#disagree -> Has this changed? Haven't laws gotten tougher. I think this is actually a really important point. This is tapping into something much deeper. The War on Drugs caused Americans to feel as if criminalizing behavior was the only way to fix problems.  I think Alexander missed the boat here. She is trying to argue White drunk drivers were spared because of their Whiteness. I would argue these *Whites* lost their White status. It also feels like weed can land people in trouble in some states still. 

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=201&annotation=E977RY4J) “In response to growing concern—fueled by advocacy groups such as MADD and by the media coverage of drunk-driving fatalities—most states adopted tougher laws to punish drunk driving. Numerous states now have some type of mandatory sentencing for this offense—typically two days in jail for a first offense and two to ten days for a second offense. Possession of a tiny amount of crack cocaine, on the other hand, carries a mandatory minimum sentence of five years in federal prison.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 201](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=202&annotation=WHMGX3TZ) “The same drug that had been considered fearsome twenty years earlier, when associated with African Americans and Latinos, was refashioned as a relatively harmless drug when associated with whites.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 202](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))

Black individuals are also often seen as supporters of mass incarceration as if to argue the system cannot be racially biased if Black leaders and Black people are also supportive of it. Alexander argues this is largely a myth, though. In reality, Black people have conflicting views on get tough crime policies since they want less crime but also for Black people to be treated more fairly. Given that the public policy solutions offered up to us are mostly or only get tough policies, it makes some sense why some Black residents would support get tough policies -> crime is bad!

* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=202&annotation=C6FSPU6Q) “Black support for 'get tough'... ” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 202](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=203&annotation=5IQPI6YL) “To begin with, the argument implies that African Americans prefer harsh criminal justice policies to other forms of governmental intervention, such as job creation, economic development, educational reform, and restorative justice programs, as the long-term solution to problems associated with crime. There is no evidence to support such a claim. To the contrary, surveys consistently show that African Americans are generally less supportive of harsh criminal justice policies than whites, even though blacks are far more likely to be victims of crime. This pattern is particularly remarkable in that less educated people tend to be more punitive and blacks on average are less educated than whites.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 203](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT)) -> #theory_challenge [[pickettPublicOpinionCriminal2019]] might disagree.
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=204&annotation=Z62AUK92) “'The young black men wreaking havoc in the ghetto are still our youngsters in the eyes of many of the decent poor and working-class black people who sometimes are their victims.'' Throughout the black community, there is widespread awareness that black ghetto youth have few, if any, realistic options, and therefore dealing drugs can be an irresistible temptation.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 204](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=204&annotation=XV4TV4LS) “... complicity with mass incarceration—not support for it. This complicity is perfectly understandable, for the threat posed by crime-particularly violent crime-is real, not imagined. Although African Americans do not engage in drug crime at significantly higher rates than whites, black men do have much higher rates of violent crime, and violent crime is concentrated in ghetto communities. Studies have shown that joblessness-not race or black culture-explains the high rates of violent crime in poor black communities. When researchers have controlled for joblessness, differences in violent crime rates between young black and white men disappear.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 204](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=205&annotation=4LANE5E4) “... that some African Americans would be complicit with the system of mass incarceration, even if they oppose, as a matter of social policy, the creation of racially isolated ghettos and the subsequent transfer of black youth from underfunded, crumbling schools to brand-new, high-tech prisons. In the era of mass incarceration, poor African Americans are not given the option of great schools, community investment, and job training. Instead, they are offered police and prisons. If the only choice that is offered blacks is rampant crime or more prisons, the predictable (and understandable) answer will be 'more prisons.'” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 205](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=205&annotation=SRXZQQME) “The predicament African Americans find themselves in today is not altogether different from the situation they faced during Jim Crow. Jim Crow, as oppressive as it was, offered a measure of security for blacks who were willing to play by its rules. Those who flouted the rules or resisted them risked the terror of the Klan. Cooperation with the Jim Crow system often seemed far more likely to increase or maintain one’s security than any alternative. That reality helps to explain why African American leaders such as Booker T. Washington urged blacks to focus on improving themselves rather than on challenging racial discrimination. It's also why the Civil Rights Movement initially met resistance among some African Americans in the South.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 205](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))
  
* [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/RNYYIP26?page=207&annotation=4LMKLG4X) “The collapse of inner-city economies coincided with the conservative backlash against the Civil Rights Movement, resulting in the perfect storm. Almost overnight, black men found themselves unnecessary to the American economy and demonized by mainstream society.” ([Alexander, 2012, p. 207](zotero://select/library/items/DRR42XXT))