---
type:
  - Article
author:
  - Judith R. Blau
  - Peter M. Blau
journal:
  - American Sociological Review
year: 1982
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`

## Metadata

* **Author(s)**: Judith R. Blau, Peter M. Blau
* **Title**: The Cost of Inequality: Metropolitan Structure and Violent Crime
* **Date of publication**: 1982
* **Journal**: American Sociological Review
* **Volume**: 47
* **Issue**: 1
* **Pages**: 114-129
* **URL**: [https://www.jstor.org/stable/2095046](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2095046)
* **Tags**: #comps_exam, #crim512, #strain_anomie, #theory_classic
* **PDF Attachments**:
  * [blauCostInequalityMetropolitan1982.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T2L7G3JF)

## Abstract

The hypothesis tested is that variations in rates of urban criminal violence largely result from differences in racial inequality in socioeconomic conditions. Data on the 125 largest American metropolitan areas (SMSAs) are used to ascertain whether this hypothesis can account for three correlates of violent crime differently interpreted in the literature. Criminal violence is positively related to location in the South, which has been interpreted as the result of the Southern tradition of violence. It is positively related to the proportion of blacks in an SMSA, which has been interpreted as reflecting a subculture of violence in ghettos. And it is positively related to poverty, which has been interpreted as the emphasis on toughness and excitement in the culture of poverty. The analysis reveals that socioeconomic inequality between races, as well as economic inequality generally, increases rates of criminal violence, but once economic inequalities are controlled poverty no longer influences these rates, neither does Southern location, and the proportion of blacks in the population hardly does. These results imply that if there is a culture of violence, its roots are pronounced economic inequalities, especially if associated with ascribed position.

## My notes

Hypothesis being tested is that variations in rates of urban crime violence results from differences in racial inequality in socioeconomic conditions.

### Findings

* Criminal violence is positively related to location in the South (culture of Southern violence).
* Crime positively related to proportion of Black Americans.
* Crime positively related to poverty.
* Socioeconomic inequality and economic inequality generally increases rates of criminal violence.
* Once economic inequalities are controlled for: poverty, proportion of Black Americans, and Southern location all lose explanatory power.
* Implies if there is a culture of violence, its roots are in economic inequalities.
	* “Apparently the relative deprivation produced by much inequality rather than the absolute deprivation produced by much poverty provides the most fertile soil for criminal violence.” #quote
* Most of the difference in violent crime rates between Black-Americans and White-Americans is attributable to socioeconomic inequality between Black and White Americans. Consequently, the differences cannot be attributed to distinctive racial attributes.

### Introduction

* Inequality in the Marxist tradition. Major sources of crime are the exploitation and oppression of the poor by the rich and the avarice capitalism stimulates in the rich and poor alike. Crime is an inherent part of the capitalist system of property relations, improving the living conditions of the poor does not fix it, only restructuring the relations of production. Generated by inherent contradictions in capitalism, and it’s a primitive form of insurrection against oppression by ruling hegemony -> Important part for Blau and Blau is the focus on inequality.
* “UCR furnishes fairly valid indications of comparative frequencies of serious crimes, thought not of their absolute frequencies.” #quote 

### Data and Methods

* Data comes from the 125 largest metropolitan areas in the USA from 1970 and from the census. Main independent variables are inequality (Gini coefficient), percent in poverty, percent Black, and region.
* Dependent variable is major violent crimes from the [[UCR]] -> murder, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault.
* Use [[ordinary least squares]] regression.