---
type: [Article]
author: [Lawrence W. Sherman, Patrick R. Gartin, Michael E. Buerger]
journal: [Criminology]
date: 1989
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`

## Metadata

* **Author(s)**: Lawrence W. Sherman, Patrick R. Gartin, Michael E. Buerger
* **Title**: Hot Spots of Predatory Crime: Routine Activities and the Criminology of Place*
* **Date of publication**: 1989
* **Journal**: Criminology
* **Volume**: 27
* **Issue**: 1
* **Pages**: 27-56
* **URL**: [https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1745-9125.1989.tb00862.x](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1745-9125.1989.tb00862.x)
* **Tags**: #comps_exam, #theory_classic, #routine_activities
* **PDF Attachments**:
  * [shermanHotSpotsPredatory1989.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/BRT5MTRQ)

## Abstract

A leading sociological theory of crime is the [[Routine activity]] approach (Cohen and Felson, 1979). The premise of this ecological theory is that criminal events result from likely offenders, suitable targets, and the absence of capable guardians against crime converging nonrandomly in time and space. Yet prior research has been unable to employ spatial data, relying instead on individual- and household-level data, to test that basic premise. This analysis supports the premise with spatial data on 323,979 calls to police over all 115,000 addresses and intersections in Minneapolis over 1 year. Relatively few “hot spots” produce most calls to Police (50% of calls in 3% of places) and calls reporting predatory crimes (all robberies at 2.2% of places, all rapes at 1.2% of places, and all auto thefts at 2.7% of places), because crime is both rare (only 3.6% of the city could have had a robbery with no repeat addresses) and concentrated, although the magnitude of concentration varies by offense type. These distributions all deviate significantly, and with ample magnitude, from the simple Poisson model of chance, which raises basic questions about the criminogenic nature of places, as distinct from neighborhoods or collectivities.

## My notes

### Introduction

* Important to note that routine activities theory does not only claim that the volume of offenders, victims, and guardians is important, but also the rhythms of the city which do (or do not) bring them into convergence with one another at high or low rates.
* Up until this point, the theory has not had granular enough [[spatio-temporal data]] to test its hypotheses.
* This paper means to simply provide a more thorough description of the timing and location of crime.
* The sociology of place -> the social organization of behavior at a geographic place. #definition .
* They also want to test how randomly distributed is crime, really.

### Data and methods

* Police call data. Victimization surveys and self-reported crime surveys would be hard to adjust for to include place. They also have some benefits over official crime statistics typically generated by policing agencies -> not as subject to the discretion of the police as to whether something rises to the level of a *crime* or not.
  
* Of course, it is not perfect. Subject to under-reporting and over-reporting. Many calls may correspond to the same event. Do not have the exact location where the even the happened (only have where the call was made and where the police were dispatched).
	* Also shaped by who has access to a phone.
	  
* Tricky to estimate the denominator -> what is the number of places a crime could occur.

### Results

* As indicated by the abstract, crime is highly concentrated and not at all randomly distributed.
  
* Crime clusters in space and having one be reported seems to be associated with more crime being reported there in the future.
  
* While there is certainly variation across communities in crime rates, the results suggest that there is also great variation within communities, as well. The authors suggests, perhaps somewhat controversially, that high-crime neighborhoods are generally safe in that the vast majority of places did not have someone call the police. Most places never had a crime reported.
  
* The concentration of crime is due to its rarity and not its abundance.
  
* We need a criminology of place distinct from a criminology of neighborhood.
  
* Rather than as [[cohenSocialChangeCrime1979]] argue about needing to change the routine activities of individuals, we should instead focus on changing places. By making changes to the environment, you can increase guardianship, decrease the supply targets, and decrease the supply of offenders. #theory_challenge "The routine activities of the person who goes to bars or convenience stores at night does not have to change for such places to be made less criminogenic." #quote 
	* Bulletproof glass for cashiers.
	* Mandating that at least people have to be working.
	* Revoke the liquor licenses of bars where violent fights break out a lot.
	* Communities buy up vacant houses.
	* Still runs into problem below of generator vs. attractor.

### Limitations

* Cannot control for exposure or population. Perhaps areas that are the most criminogenic simply have the most people flowing through them at specific times. The per capita risk, then, is not something to worry about.
  
* Similarly certain stores may be victimized more because they are open longer and on more days.
  
* Are certain places actually criminogenic? Or do they merely attract crime? Stated another way, if the place were to be gotten rid of, would the crime disappear? Or would the crime be displaced to a new area? #question 
	* Likely to depend on the type of crime (predatory crime, market crime, domestic violence disputes).
	