---
type: [Article]
author: [Thomas D. Stucky, John R. Ottensmann]
journal: [Criminology]
date: 2009
---

* **Creation date**: `= this.file.ctime`
* **Last modified date**: `= this.file.mtime`

## Metadata

* **Author(s)**: Thomas D. Stucky, John R. Ottensmann
* **Title**: Land Use and Violent Crime*
* **Date of publication**: 2009
* **Journal**: Criminology
* **Volume**: 47
* **Issue**: 4
* **Pages**: 1223-1264
* **URL**: [https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2009.00174.x](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2009.00174.x)
* **Tags**: #comps_exam, #criminology, #theory_advancement, #routine_activities
* **PDF Attachments**:
  * [stuckyLandUseViolent2009.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/HH3SIZCD)

## Abstract

Although research has shown specific land uses to be related to crime, systematic investigation of land uses and violent crime has been less common. This study systematically examines links between land uses and violent crime and assesses whether such links are conditioned by socioeconomic disadvantage. We employ geocoded Uniform Crime Report (UCR) data from the Indianapolis police department and information on 30 categories of land use and demographic information from the 2000 U.S. Census. We use land use variables to predict violent crime counts in 1,000 × 1,000-feet grid cells using negative binomial regression models. Results indicate that, net of other variables, specific land uses predict variation in counts for individual violent crimes and aggregate rates. Some nonresidential land uses are associated with higher violent crime counts, whereas others are associated with lower counts. Specific land uses also condition the effects of socioeconomic disadvantage on violent crime. The implications for [[Routine activity]] and [[Social disorganization|social disorganization]] theories of crime are discussed.

## My notes

### Research question

* No research to date has systematically examined links between particular land uses and violent crime. E.g., criminologists have long assumed *mixed land usage* produces criminogenic effects because of the confluence of targets and offenders.
	* Most studies create aggregate measures of land usage lumping all nonresidential land together.
  
* Most researchers also assume land use is not moderated by social context. E.g, Mixed land usage is expected to be the same in advantaged and disadvantaged areas.

### Data and methods

* Data comes from the Indianapolis Police Department, [[UCR]] data from 2000-2004, land use data from indianapolis, and 2000 Census data.
  
* Unit of analysis are 2,142 one thousand foot square grid cells overlaid on the IPD's service area. This grid approach is much better than even using census blocks they argue. The maps seem convincing enough.
  
* **Dependent variable** -> Geocoded UCR data for IPD service area from 2000-2004 to examine violent index offenses.

* **Control variables** -> Socioeconomic variables were generated by overlaying the grid cells on top of census tracts and census blocks. Blocks and tracts split by grid cells had their values apportioned to the cells based on the proportion of the area of the block or tract within the cell.
  
* They have a lot of designations for land usage. The main categories are: residential, commercial, vacant, agriculture, industrial, hospital, school, cemetery, church, utility, park, water, unknown, mixed use, or airport. Land parcels were intersected with the grids and land usage percentages were calculated.
  
* Use a [[negative binomial regression]]. They introduce a spatial lag to deal with [[spatial autocorrelation]]. They include a weight matrix of the 8 adjacent cells and the spatial lag is the weighted crime average of those 8 cells.

### Results

#### Table 2

* Presence of high density residential units and percent dedicated to commerce are significantly related to higher violent crime. Percentage of cell dedicated to industry is **significantly negatively** related to violent crime.
	* Not all nonresidential land uses are equally associated with higher crime.
	  
* They go on to list all their other results for all the other land usage types.

#### Table 3

* High density residential housing has a positive interaction with disadvantage. I.e., as neighborhoods become more disadvantaged, the criminogenic aspects of high density residential housing also increase.
  
* Negative interaction between disadvantage and percent of land dedicated to commercial usage **and** for industrial use. Increasing commercial usage of land is moderately criminogenic in advantaged neighborhoods versus not really at all for disadvantaged neighborhoods.

The effects of land usage on crime are moderated by social context. This suggests we need to re-examine our beliefs as to why certain land uses promote or inhibit crime.

Physical characteristics of neighborhoods (as well as their socioeconomic characteristics) are important for structuring social interactions in ways that promote or inhibit delinquency. In fact, certain socioeconomic arrangements may produce certain configurations of land usage in different types of neighborhoods.